Once an internal autopsy is complete the body is generally reconstituted by sewing it back together.

When used as a countable noun, a history is a representation of the past in the form of a history text.

In this role, history also challenges traditional myths lacking factual support.

Khaldun, an Arab living in the 14th century, understood society, along with the rest of the universe, as having "meaningful configuration", with its perceived randomness attributable to hidden causes.

Estimates on the advent of artificial general intelligence vary, but half of machine learning experts surveyed in 2018 believe that AI will "accomplish every task better and more cheaply" than humans by 2063, and automate all human jobs by 2140.

In English, the term emerged from the Romance languages in the late 15th century, with the meaning of "news"; it came to indicate something new, without a distinction between fact or fiction.

After a death, an obituary may be posted in a newspaper, and the "survived by" kin and friends usually go through the grieving process.

Another development was the emergence of New Confucianism, which aims to modernize and rethink Confucian teachings to explore their compatibility with democratic ideals and modern science.

The opposite viewpoint is that language is such a unique human trait that it cannot be compared to anything found among non-humans and that it must therefore have appeared suddenly in the transition from pre-hominids to early man.

Ancient Greek art introduced veneration of the animal form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty, and anatomically correct proportions.

A proven instance that forms part of a more general finding is termed a corollary.

Apart from armed conflicts, areas with high incidence of violence, such as regions controlled by drug cartels, also see men experiencing higher mortality rates.

Its adherents, the Mandaeans, consider John the Baptist to be their chief prophet.

== Fatherhood ==

Men may have children, whether biological or adopted; such men are called fathers.

=== Anti-technology backlash ===

Technology's central role in our lives has drawn concerns and backlash.

In cases of electric shock, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for an hour or longer can allow stunned nerves to recover, allowing an apparently dead person to survive.

After it starts to run out of fuel, it starts to expand, this can be analogous to the star aging.

Labels cater to niche markets, such as preteens.

Suprasegmental phenomena encompass such elements as stress, phonation type, voice timbre, and prosody or intonation, all of which may have effects across multiple segments.

Early forms of historical writing mixed facts with mythological elements, such as the Epic of Gilgamesh from ancient Mesopotamia and the Odyssey, an ancient Greek text attributed to Homer.

The undocumented immigrant population in the U.S. reached a record high of 14 million in 2023.

The new social, economic, and political complexities necessitated the development of writing systems.

The popularity of recreational mathematics is another sign of the pleasure many find in solving mathematical questions.

Calculus, consisting of the two subfields differential calculus and integral calculus, is the study of continuous functions, which model the typically nonlinear relationships between varying quantities, as represented by variables.

Muslims believe it was transcribed in the Arabic dialect of the Quraysh, the tribe of Muhammad.

Meta-ethics asks abstract questions about the nature and sources of morality.

Copyright law is largely harmonized in the Union, although country to country differences exist.

Additional western territories and states were created.

Literature is often referred to synecdochically as "writing," especially creative writing, and poetically as "the craft of writing" (or simply "the craft").

The body of law was implemented in the EU through a number of directives, which the member states need to enact into their national law.

A central topic in historiography as a metatheory focuses on the standards of evidence and reasoning in historical inquiry.

Apart from professional business attire, American fashion is eclectic and predominantly informal.

According to one view, some particular facts are objective, for example, facts about when a drought occurred or which army was defeated.

Throughout classical South Asia, the study of law consisted of concepts such as penance through piety and ceremonial as well as practical traditions.

Early Roman historians used an annalistic style, arranging past events by year with little commentary, while later ones preferred a more narrative and analytical approach.

Cultural movements in art and craftsmanship in colonial America generally lagged behind those of Western Europe.

In the later part of the ancient period, sometimes termed the classical period, societies in China, India, Persia, and the Mediterranean expanded further, reaching new cultural, scientific, and political heights.

Several Minoan private homes also had toilets, which could be flushed by pouring water down the drain.

Under the First Amendment to the Constitution, the United States is considered to have the strongest protections of free speech of any country.

Certain branches of history are distinguished by their theoretical outlook, such as Marxist and feminist history.

Oral, manual and tactile languages contain a phonological system that governs how symbols are used to form sequences known as words or morphemes, and a syntactic system that governs how words and morphemes are combined to form phrases and utterances.

Saussure also introduced several basic dimensions of linguistic analysis that are still fundamental in many contemporary linguistic theories, such as the distinctions between syntagm and paradigm, and the Langue-parole distinction, distinguishing language as an abstract system (langue), from language as a concrete manifestation of this system (parole).

While technology contributes to economic development and improves human prosperity, it can also have negative impacts like pollution and resource depletion, and can cause social harms like technological unemployment resulting from automation.

The direction used in a writing system is entirely arbitrary and established by convention.

More precisely, numbers and other mathematical objects are represented by symbols called variables, which are generally Latin or Greek letters, and often include subscripts.

Some languages change the meaning of words by changing the phonological structure of a word, for example, the English word "run", which in the past tense is "ran".

The study of male reproduction and associated organs is called andrology.

In my opinion, that is sufficient to provide us with a feeling of an objective existence, of a reality of mathematics ...

Consonants can also be either voiced or unvoiced, depending on whether the vocal cords are set in vibration by airflow during the production of the sound.

In 2024, the median age of the United States population was 39.1 years.

Unlike conventional human languages, a formal language in this sense is a system of signs for encoding and decoding information.

Hakka, Cantonese and Mandarin are, for example, often classified as "dialects" of Chinese, even though they are more different from each other than Swedish is from Norwegian.

Several European leaders are atheists (e.g., France's former president Francois Hollande or Greece's prime minister Alexis Tsipras).

Joseph Campbell remarked, "Mythology is often thought of as other people's religions, and religion can be defined as misinterpreted mythology."

King has suggested that one way to evaluate the expression of grief in animals is to look for altered behaviors such as social withdrawal, disrupted eating or sleeping, expression of affect, or increased stress reactions in response to the death of a family member, mate, or friend.

It investigates the nature and purpose of government and compares its different forms.

Although mathematics is extensively used for modeling phenomena, the fundamental truths of mathematics are independent of any scientific experimentation.

Some areas of mathematics, such as statistics and game theory, are developed in close correlation with their applications and are often grouped under applied mathematics.

The Human Genome Project was formally launched in 1990, while Nasdaq became the first stock market in the United States to trade online in 1998.

St. Martin's Press.

An artist who excels in drawing is referred to as a drafter, draftswoman, or draughtsman.

== Core branches ==

Philosophical questions can be grouped into several branches.

Many projects aim to prevent or slow this loss by revitalizing endangered languages and promoting education and literacy in minority languages.

Those with this aphasia also exhibit ungrammatical speech and show inability to use syntactic information to determine the meaning of sentences.

In Latin and English, until around 1700, the term mathematics more commonly meant "astrology" (or sometimes "astronomy") rather than "mathematics"; the meaning gradually changed to its present one from about 1500 to 1800.

Common topics of interest include marriage and the family and human rights.

It went into effect in 1789, creating a federal republic governed by three separate branches that together formed a system of checks and balances.

Americans have the highest average household and employee income among OECD member states, and the fourth-highest median household income in 2023, up from sixth-highest in 2013.

In the Islamic world, new traditions of historical writings emerged in the Safavid, Mughal, and Ottoman Empires.

Money has since evolved into governmental issued coins, paper and electronic money.

"[x [is y]]" or "[x [does y]]".

=== University discipline ===


==== In England ====

In late 1820s England, growing political and social awareness, "particularly among the utilitarians and Benthamites, promoted the possibility of including courses in English literary study in the newly formed London University".

The average lifespan is determined by vulnerability to accidents and age or lifestyle-related afflictions such as cancer or cardiovascular disease.

Since the 1970s, there has been a decoupling of U.S. wage gains from worker productivity.

Analog computers were invented and asserted dominance in processing complex data.

The ancient Romans also had a complex system of aqueducts, which were used to transport water across long distances.

Men would traditionally marry a woman when raising children, but in modern times many countries now allow for same-sex marriage, and for those couples to raise children either via adoption or surrogacy.

It employed their ideas to elaborate and interpret the teachings of the Quran.

St. Vincent's Manual.

In sign languages, the equivalent to phonemes (formerly called cheremes) are defined by the basic elements of gestures, such as hand shape, orientation, location, and motion, which correspond to manners of articulation in spoken language.

Early work in neurolinguistics involved the study of language in people with brain lesions, to see how lesions in specific areas affect language and speech.

The premises of non-deductive arguments also support their conclusion, although this support does not guarantee that the conclusion is true.

=== Chinese ===

Chinese philosophy is particularly interested in practical questions associated with right social conduct, government, and self-cultivation.

"Causes of Death 1916".

Primarily, the compromise prohibited slavery in all other lands of the Louisiana Purchase north of the 36°30′ parallel.

Sometimes a simple change triggers a chain shift in which the entire phonological system is affected.

The 'Social' and Beyond: Introducing Actor Network Theory, article examining different meanings of the concept 'social'

Language is a structured system of communication that consists of grammar and vocabulary.

The Sanskrit word dharma, sometimes translated as religion, also means law.

Models provide clarity and precision, enabling the translation of theoretical concepts into quantifiable predictions that can be tested against real-world data.

Industrial societies are often capitalist, and have high degrees of inequality along with high social mobility, as businesspeople use the market to amass large amounts of wealth.

Most scholars describe the United States as a liberal democracy.

86–88.

The symbol is identical to the planetary symbol of Mars.

Historians studying the ancient period examine the emergence of the first major civilizations in regions such as Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus Valley, China, and Peru, beginning approximately 3500 BCE in some regions.

This period also saw the emergence of non-Vedic teachings, like Buddhism and Jainism.

Intersex men may have sex characteristics that do not fit typical notions of male biology.

Various social revolutions challenged autocratic and colonial regimes, paving the way for democracies.

A biologist explains life and death in different kinds of organisms, in relation to evolution.

=== Iranian ===
Iranian religions are ancient religions whose roots predate the Islamization of Greater Iran.

For example, volcanoes, batteries, electrical components, and stars are often said to "die" once they reach the end of their active state.

Greek philosophers such as Gorgias and Plato debated the relation between words, concepts and reality.

Its initial phase as Bábism forms an integral part of its history.

The U.S. dollar is the currency most used in international transactions and the world's foremost reserve currency, backed by the country's dominant economy, its military, the petrodollar system, its large U.S. treasuries market, and its linked eurodollar.

On average, men have a larger waist in comparison to their hips (see waist–hip ratio) than women.

Historically, most of the individual sciences originated from philosophy.

Scholars have indicated that global religiosity may be increasing due to religious countries having higher birth rates in general.

=== In sociology ===

In Western sociology, there are three dominant paradigms for understanding society: functionalism (also known as structural functionalism), conflict theory, and symbolic interactionism.

This does not mean that there is no place for creativity in a mathematical work.

Deontologists judge actions based on whether they follow moral duties, such as abstaining from lying or killing.

The philosophy of language studies the nature and function of language.

Three states and four U.S. territories have recognized local or indigenous languages in addition to English: Hawaii (Hawaiian), Alaska (twenty Native languages), South Dakota (Sioux), American Samoa (Samoan), Puerto Rico (Spanish), Guam (Chamorro), and the Northern Mariana Islands (Carolinian and Chamorro).

Historical linguistics studies the development of languages over time, which can be crucial for the interpretation of ancient documents and can also provide information about migration patterns and cultural exchanges.

These culturally defined relationships are referred to as kinship.

In total, 169 Native American languages are spoken in the United States.

=== Law enforcement and criminal justice ===

There are about 18,000 U.S. police agencies from local to national level in the United States.

All human societies organize, recognize and classify types of social relationships based on relations between parents, children and other descendants (consanguinity), and relations through marriage (affinity).

The 1998 book Proofs from THE BOOK, inspired by Erdős, is a collection of particularly succinct and revelatory mathematical arguments.

They may express the equivalent of an entire English sentence in a single word.

Skeletonization, the end of decomposition, where all soft tissues have decomposed, leaving only the skeleton.

The primary sewer in Rome was the Cloaca Maxima; construction began on it in the sixth century BCE and it is still in use today.

Different people have different responses to the idea of their deaths.

"; "How is truth established?

Digital tools with similar effects are also used.

Nodes of this network are closely bound to procedures useful in human activities and to questions arising in science.

There are religions (including Buddhism and Taoism) that classify some of their followers as agnostic, atheistic, or nontheistic.

In the U.S., the intercollegiate sports level serves as the main feeder system for professional and Olympic sports, with significant exceptions such as Minor League Baseball.

=== Censorship ===

Censorship of literature is employed by states, religious organizations, educational institutions, etc., to control what can be portrayed, spoken, performed, or written.

In western cultures, the Grim Reaper, or figures similar to it, is the most popular depiction of death.

Informal history education also happens in oral traditions as narratives about the past are transmitted across generations.

Human language is characterized by its cultural and historical diversity, with significant variations observed between cultures and across time.

Nonetheless, our knowledge of the neurological bases for language is quite limited, though it has advanced considerably with the use of modern imaging techniques.

==== Islam ====

Islam is a monotheistic religion based on the Quran, one of the holy books considered by Muslims to be revealed by God, and on the teachings (hadith) of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, a major political and religious figure of the 7th century CE.

It is a common belief, going back to the biblical narrative of the tower of Babel in the Old Testament, that linguistic diversity causes political conflict, but many of the world's major episodes of violence have taken place in situations with low linguistic diversity, such as the Yugoslav and American Civil War, or the genocide of Rwanda.

In martial arts, kata is compared to dance.

Consequentialists judge actions based on their consequences.

16–18.

Abortion in the United States is not federally protected, and is illegal or restricted in 17 states.

Like social scientists, historians formulate hypotheses, gather objective evidence, and present arguments based on this evidence.

Religious practice varies significantly by region.

Discussing, thinking about, or planning for their deaths causes them discomfort.

According to Jean Ziegler, the United Nations Special Reporter on the Right to Food, 2000 – Mar 2008, mortality due to malnutrition accounted for 58% of the total mortality rate in 2006.

For example, in all languages, linguistic expressions can be used not just to transmit information, but to perform actions.

Nearly all present Americans or their ancestors came from Europe, Africa, or Asia (the "Old World") within the past five centuries.

"America" is the feminine form of the first word of Americus Vesputius, the Latinized name of Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci (1454–1512); it was first used as a place name by the German cartographers Martin Waldseemüller and Matthias Ringmann in 1507.

They contend that this base-level of experience provides the foundation for higher-order theoretical knowledge, and that one needs to understand the former to understand the latter.

== Performing arts ==

Performing arts comprise dance, music, theatre, opera, mime, and other art forms in which human performance is the principal product.

"A man born in 1453, the year of the fall of Constantinople, could look back from his fiftieth year on a lifetime in which about eight million books had been printed, more perhaps than all the scribes of Europe had produced since Constantine founded his city in A.D.

The applied arts include fields such as industrial design, illustration, and commercial art.

By making students aware of significant developments in the past, they can become familiar with various contexts of human life, helping them understand the present and its diverse cultures.

Language contact may also lead to a variety of other linguistic phenomena, including language convergence, borrowing, and relexification (the replacement of much of the native vocabulary with that of another language).

=== Interfaith cooperation ===

Because religion continues to be recognized in Western thought as a universal impulse, many religious practitioners have aimed to band together in interfaith dialogue, cooperation, and religious peacebuilding.

In ancient India, historical narratives were closely associated with religion.

When religion is seen in terms of sacred, divine, intensive valuing, or ultimate concern, then it is possible to understand why scientific findings and philosophical criticisms (e.g., those made by Richard Dawkins) do not necessarily disturb its adherents.

War broke out in April 1861 after the Confederacy bombarded Fort Sumter.

Nobel Prizes in Literature have been awarded between 1901 and 2020 to 117 individuals: 101 men and 16 women.

The awards are given for Broadway productions and performances.

In many places, religion has been associated with public institutions such as education, hospitals, the family, government, and political hierarchies.

Performing arts are also supported by the services of other artists or essential workers, such as songwriters and those involved with stagecraft.

At the end of 2018, as a result of the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, the 70-year term was applied to all works.

In March 2022, North Korea used Blender.io, a mixer which helped them to hide their cryptocurrency exchanges, to launder over $20.5 million in cryptocurrency, from Axie Infinity, and steal over $600 million worth of cryptocurrency from the game's owner.

In paternal societies, men have typically have been regarded as the "head of household" and held additional social privileges.

Most of Alaska is subarctic or polar.

Of the world's 50 busiest container ports, four are located in the United States, with the busiest in the country being the Port of Los Angeles.

Major cities often have alternative newspapers to complement the mainstream daily papers, such as The Village Voice in New York City and LA Weekly in Los Angeles.

Service industries include education, health and finance.

Thanks to advancements in agriculture, surplus food allowed these civilizations to support larger populations, leading to urbanization, the establishment of trade networks, and the emergence of regional empires.

Paul Tillich looked at religion as the soul of culture and culture as the form or framework of religion.

The variety of art movements has resulted in a division of art criticism into different disciplines, which may each use different criteria for their judgements.

This is not a unified practice; in Tibet, for instance, the body is given a sky burial and left on a mountain top.

More generally, futures researchers are interested in improving "the freedom and welfare of humankind".

Following the Great Migration to northern cities, African-American and black West Indian authors of the Harlem Renaissance developed an independent tradition of literature that rebuked a history of inequality and celebrated black culture.

The discovery of fire was described by Charles Darwin as "possibly the greatest ever made by man".

In a traditional opera, the work uses the following: sets, costumes, acting, a libretto, singers, and an orchestra.

New York Fashion Week is one of the most influential fashion shows in the world, and is held twice each year in Manhattan; the annual Met Gala, also in Manhattan, has been called the fashion world's "biggest night".

A striking aspect of the interaction between mathematics and physics is when mathematics drives research in physics.

In 2022, most of the 19,969 U.S. airports were owned and operated by local government authorities, and there are also some private airports.

The Austronesian languages are considered to have originated in Taiwan around 3000 BC and spread through the Oceanic region through island-hopping, based on an advanced nautical technology.

Functionalist theories tend to study grammar as dynamic phenomena, as structures that are always in the process of changing as they are employed by their speakers.

One tool to provide an accessible overview of complex developments is the use of periodization, which divides a timeframe into different periods, each organized around central themes or developments that shaped the period.

Warren Farrell, The Myth of Male Power, Berkley Trade, 1993.

The scope of algebra thus grew to include the study of algebraic structures.

Many schools of thought emerged in the 6th century BCE in competing attempts to resolve the political turbulence of that period.

=== Social ===


==== Jobs ====
Since the invention of the wheel, technologies have helped increase humans' economic output.

Some approaches rely primarily on the beliefs and actions of individual humans, while others include collective and other general entities, such as civilizations, institutions, ideologies, and social forces.

Geopolitical tensions between the two superpowers soon led to the Cold War.

Mathematics uses pure reason to prove the properties of objects through proofs, which consist of a succession of applications of deductive rules to already established results.

Historicism contrasts with approaches that seek a timeless and universal understanding of their subject matter.

Such mathematical modeling allows one to probe economic mechanisms.

When speaking of language as a general concept, definitions can be used which stress different aspects of the phenomenon.

SDFs are authorized by state and federal law but are under the command of the state's governor.

This stems from social beliefs that associate ideals of masculinity with aggressive, confrontational behavior.

If naturally occurring famines are considered natural disasters, the Chinese famine of 1906–1907, which killed 15–20 million people, can be considered the deadliest natural disaster in recorded history.

Philosophers have also investigated the concepts of justice and equality and their implications with respect to the prejudicial treatment of women in male-dominated societies.

Confucianism was founded by Confucius (551–479 BCE).

The U.S. has acquired significant hard and soft power through its diplomatic influence, economic power, military alliances, and cultural exports such as American movies, music, video games, sports, and food.

Where a special concept of rigor comes into play is in the socialized aspects of a proof, wherein it may be demonstrably refuted by other mathematicians.

In developing nations, inferior sanitary conditions and lack of access to modern medical technology make death from infectious diseases more common than in developed countries.

The United States was one of the "Four Policemen" who met to plan the post-war world, alongside the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and China.

Over the next millennia, major empires arose beside them, such as the Teotihuacan, Aztec, and Inca empires.

Several countries use it as their official currency, and in others it is the de facto currency.

Multilingualism is likely to have been the norm throughout human history and most people in the modern world are multilingual.

African Americans endured a period of heightened, overt racism following Reconstruction, a time often considered the nadir of American race relations.

94–99.

Signs can be composed of sounds, gestures, letters, or symbols, depending on whether the language is spoken, signed, or written, and they can be combined into complex signs, such as words and phrases.

The shared features of languages which belong to the same typological class type may have arisen completely independently.

Shaped by centuries of immigration, the culture of the U.S. is diverse and globally influential.

Continuity-based theories are held by a majority of scholars, but they vary in how they envision this development.

They often mixed factual accounts with supernatural elements, as seen in works like the Mahabharata.

By definition, the arts themselves are open to being continually redefined.

Both the president and the vice president serve a four-year term, and the president may be reelected to the office only once, for one additional four-year term.

=== Federal government ===

Composed of three branches, all headquartered in Washington, D.C., the federal government is the national government of the United States.

Past automation has both substituted and complemented labor; machines replaced humans at some lower-paying jobs (for example in agriculture), but this was compensated by the creation of new, higher-paying jobs.

In societies where men are not given special legal privileges, they typically hold more positions of power, and men are seen as being taken more seriously in society.

The form is combined with music and dance in opera and musical theatre (see libretto).

Deixis is an important part of the way that we use language to point out entities in the world.

For example, in a language that does not distinguish between voiced and unvoiced consonants, the sounds [p] and [b] (if they both occur) could be considered a single phoneme, and consequently, the two pronunciations would have the same meaning.

Male anatomy is distinguished from female anatomy by the male reproductive system, which includes the testicles, sperm ducts, prostate gland and epididymides, and penis.

The United States is considered to be a world leader in the development of artificial intelligence technology.

According to empiricists, all knowledge is based on some form of experience.

The period between approximately the 6th to 1st centuries BC saw the composition and redaction of the two most influential Indian epics, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, with subsequent redaction progressing down to the 4th century AD such as Ramcharitmanas.

The humanities philosophy of technology is concerned with the "meaning of technology for, and its impact on, society and culture".

Many artistic disciplines such as performing arts, conceptual art, and textile arts, also involve aspects of the visual arts, as well as arts of other types.

The Olympic Games will be held in the U.S. for a ninth time when Los Angeles hosts the 2028 Summer Olympics.

In the 6th century BC, Greek mathematics began to emerge as a distinct discipline and some Ancient Greeks such as the Pythagoreans appeared to have considered it a subject in its own right.

Avicenna (980–1037 CE) also followed this goal and developed a comprehensive philosophical system to provide a rational understanding of reality encompassing science, religion, and mysticism.

A study demonstrated that general proximity to Manhattan's Garment District has been synonymous with American fashion since its inception in the early 20th century.

The U.S. also asserts sovereignty over five permanently inhabited territories: American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

Shortly before and after the Revolutionary War, the newspaper rose to prominence, filling a demand for anti-British national literature.

These kinds of differences are not part of the linguistic system, but are an important part of how people use language as a social tool for constructing groups.

2 (February 2025), pp.

The next and highest court in the system is the Supreme Court of the United States.

The Jewish people were scattered after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem in 70 CE.

On the contrary, many important mathematical results (theorems) are solutions of problems that other mathematicians failed to solve, and the invention of a way for solving them may be a fundamental way of the solving process.

Other first-level areas emerged during the 20th century or had not previously been considered as mathematics, such as mathematical logic and foundations.

The lack of electrical brain activity may not be enough to consider someone scientifically dead.

The Constitution of the United States serves as the country's supreme legal document.

A characteristic of this style is that local colour is defined by an outline, the cartoon being a contemporary equivalent.

Critics ask whether the information is reliable or misrepresents the topic and further question whether the source is comprehensive or omits important details.

3 (September 2018), pp.

Quine.

"; "What may I hope?

Other folk and new religions of East Asia and Southeast Asia such as Korean shamanism, Chondogyo, and Jeung San Do in Korea; indigenous Philippine folk religions in the Philippines; Shinto, Shugendo, Ryukyuan religion, and Japanese new religions in Japan; Satsana Phi in Laos; Vietnamese folk religion, and Cao Đài, Hòa Hảo in Vietnam.

Furthermore, morphology distinguishes between the process of inflection, which modifies or elaborates on a word, and the process of derivation, which creates a new word from an existing one.

These societies can be subdivided according to their level of technology and their method of producing food.

Another definition characterizes philosophy as thinking about thinking to emphasize its self-critical, reflective nature.

Genetic engineering will allow far greater control over human biological nature through a process called directed evolution.

Similarly, the English language does not distinguish phonemically between aspirated and non-aspirated pronunciations of consonants, as many other languages like Korean and Hindi do: the unaspirated /p/ in spin [spɪn] and the aspirated /p/ in pin [pʰɪn] are considered to be merely different ways of pronouncing the same phoneme (such variants of a single phoneme are called allophones), whereas in Mandarin Chinese, the same difference in pronunciation distinguishes between the words [pʰá] 'crouch' and [pá] 'eight' (the accent above the á means that the vowel is pronounced with a high tone).

While mainstream culture holds that the United States is a classless society, scholars identify significant differences between the country's social classes, affecting socialization, language, and values.

Around 2 Mya (million years ago), they learned to make the first stone tools by hammering flakes off a pebble, forming a sharp hand axe.

Through its association with the Young British Artists and the Turner Prize during the 1990s, the popular usage of conceptual art, particularly in the United Kingdom, developed into a synonym for all contemporary art that does not practice the traditional skills of painting and sculpture.

Western societies may like to treat the dead with the utmost material respect, with an official embalmer and associated rites.

Some definitions include the wider design of the built environment, from the macro level of urban planning, urban design, and landscape architecture, to the micro level of creating furniture.

American football is by several measures the most popular spectator sport in the United States; the National Football League has the highest average attendance of any sports league in the world, and the Super Bowl is watched by tens of millions globally.

Under this interpretation, history is what happened rather than the academic field studying what happened.

=== Cold War and social revolution (1945–1991) ===

The end of World War II in 1945 left the U.S. and the Soviet Union as superpowers, each with its own political, military, and economic sphere of influence.

However, Sumerian scribes already studied the differences between Sumerian and Akkadian grammar around 1900 BC.

In general, clinical death is neither necessary nor sufficient for a determination of legal death.

A greater food surplus results in towns that become centers of trade.

At the same time, while 23% of US adults are religiously unaffiliated, only one former member of Congress (Kyrsten Sinema, Arizona), or 0.2% of that body, claims no religious affiliation.

== In biology ==

Death plays a role in extinction, which is generally considered to be the death of the last individual of a species.

Other definitions focus on the contrast between science and philosophy.

The idea of wilderness has shaped the management of public lands since 1964, with the Wilderness Act.

State prisons, run by the department of corrections of each state, hold people sentenced and serving prison time (usually longer than one year) for felony offenses.

The invention of the wheel revolutionized trade and war.

The discovery of new methods has often had important consequences both for how philosophers conduct their research and for what claims they defend.

As the arts respond to news and politics, they take on political as well as social dimensions, becoming a focus of controversy and a force of political and social change.

Philosophical ideas have prepared and shaped various political developments.

Languages differ not only in pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar, but also through having different "cultures of speaking."

Before the rise of the concept of the ethno-national state, monolingualism was characteristic mainly of populations inhabiting small islands.

A wide variety of materials may be worked by removal such as carving, assembled by welding or modelling, or moulded or cast.

It is the most widely practiced religion of Southeast Asia, North Africa, Western Asia, and Central Asia, while Muslim-majority countries also exist in parts of South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Europe.

Islam is based on the unity of all religious philosophies and accepts all of the Abrahamic prophets of Judaism, Christianity and other Abrahamic religions before Muhammad.

A 2021 analysis shows that patents that are based on scientific discoveries are on average 26% more valuable than equivalent non-science-based patents.

The Wall Street Crash of 1929 triggered the Great Depression, to which President Franklin D. Roosevelt responded with the New Deal plan of "reform, recovery and relief", a series of unprecedented and sweeping recovery programs and employment relief projects combined with financial reforms and regulations.

=== Metaphysics ===

Metaphysics is the study of the most general features of reality, such as existence, objects and their properties, wholes and their parts, space and time, events, and causation.

A secondary source is a source that analyses or interprets information found in other sources.

Variables allow mathematicians to describe the operations that have to be done on the numbers represented using mathematical formulas.

Perhaps the foremost mathematician of the 19th century was the German mathematician Carl Gauss, who made numerous contributions to fields such as algebra, analysis, differential geometry, matrix theory, number theory, and statistics.

Death was defined as the cessation of heartbeat (cardiac arrest) and breathing, but the development of CPR and prompt defibrillation have rendered that definition inadequate because breathing and heartbeat can sometimes be restarted.

In this regard, it plays a key role in providing an interdisciplinary perspective.

The U.S. is a socially progressive country with permissive attitudes surrounding human sexuality.

In 1920, a constitutional amendment granted nationwide women's suffrage.

Marshals Service have national jurisdiction and specialized duties, such as protecting civil rights, national security, enforcing U.S. federal courts' rulings and federal laws, and interstate criminal activity.

In North American mythology, the theme of a man who wants to be immortal and a man who wants to die can be seen across many Indigenous people.

Branches associated with specific research methods and sources include quantitative history, comparative history, and oral history.

== Evolution of the discipline ==
Before the invention of writing, the preservation and transmission of historical knowledge were limited to oral traditions.

The synthesizer, turntablism, and electronic music were also largely developed in the U.S.

State courts conduct almost all civil and criminal trials, while federal courts adjudicate the much smaller number of civil and criminal cases that relate to federal law.

While modernism generally took on an international character, modernist authors working within the United States more often rooted their work in specific regions, peoples, and cultures.

They engage in historical writing to develop the skills of articulating their thoughts clearly and persuasively.

Their genes are thus eventually bred out of a population, leading at worst to extinction and, more positively, making the process possible, referred to as speciation.

Television is sometimes called the "eighth" and comics the "ninth art" in Francophone scholarship, adding to the traditional "Seven Arts".

Theories that stress continuity often look at animals to see if, for example, primates display any traits that can be seen as analogous to what pre-human language must have been like.

== Origin ==

Theories about the origin of language differ in regard to their basic assumptions about what language is.

Several months after a child begins producing words, the child will produce two-word utterances, and within a few more months will begin to produce telegraphic speech, or short sentences that are less grammatically complex than adult speech, but that do show regular syntactic structure.

The oldest journal addressing instruction in mathematics was L'Enseignement Mathématique, which began publication in 1899.

In other words, the distinction may hinge on political considerations as much as on cultural differences as on distinctive writing systems or the degree of mutual intelligibility.

Further topics include the essence of works of art and the processes involved in creating them.

There is some evidence that the use of writing also has effects on the cognitive development of humans, perhaps because acquiring literacy generally requires explicit and formal education.

For example, they play an important role in thought experiments, which employ counterfactual thinking to evaluate the possible consequences of an imagined situation.

Thomas Tegg & Sons.

"; and "Can we prove causal relations?"

==== Computing ====

Computing is closely related to mathematics in several ways.

=== Human versus animal language ===

A number of features, many of which were described by Charles Hockett and called design features set human language apart from communication used by non-human animals.

Fundamental items of a man's wardrobe include shirts, trousers, suits, and jackets, which are designed to provide both comfort and style while prioritizing functionality.

Religious believers may or may not accept such symbolic interpretations.

Eastern Christianity, which include Eastern Orthodoxy, Oriental Orthodoxy, and the Church of the East.

Largely centered in the New York City region from its beginnings in the late 19th century through the first decades of the 20th century, the U.S. film industry has since been primarily based in and around Hollywood.

The ancient philosopher Plato argued that abstractions that reflect material reality have themselves a reality that exists outside space and time.

While European settlers in what is now the United States experienced conflicts with Native Americans, they also engaged in trade, exchanging European tools for food and animal pelts.

Religion is more complex and is often composed of social institutions and has a moral aspect.

The earliest form of which there exists substantial knowledge is Greek drama.

In this way, social pressure could be exerted without directly causing embarrassment or social exclusion.

Africa is home to a large number of language families, the largest of which is the Niger-Congo language family, which includes such languages as Swahili, Shona, and Yoruba.

The lack of surviving texts about the Greek and Roman religious traditions have led scholars to presume that these were ritualistic and transmitted as oral traditions, but some scholars disagree that the complex rituals in the ancient Greek and Roman civilizations were an exclusive product of an oral tradition.

The former is perceived as relatively liberal in its political platform while the latter is perceived as relatively conservative in its platform.

The main techniques used in drawing are line drawing, hatching, cross-hatching, random hatching, scribbling, stippling, and blending.

According to the American Community Survey (2020), some 245.4 million people in the U.S. age five and older spoke only English at home.

The 21st century has been marked by the rise of American streaming platforms, which came to rival traditional cinema.

After the British surrender at the siege of Yorktown in 1781, American sovereignty was internationally recognized by the Treaty of Paris (1783), through which the U.S. gained territory stretching west to the Mississippi River, north to present-day Canada, and south to Spanish Florida.

It culminated in the 19th and early 20th centuries when many parts of Asia came under direct colonial control until the end of World War II.

=== Cinema ===

The U.S. film industry has a worldwide influence and following.

History is related to many fields, including historiography, philosophy, education, and politics.

For example, in Peano arithmetic, the natural numbers are defined by "zero is a number", "each number has a unique successor", "each number but zero has a unique predecessor", and some rules of reasoning.

ISBN 978-0-7382-0336-2.

According to Roman philosopher Cicero, religiō comes from relegere: re (meaning 'again') + lego (meaning 'read'), where lego is in the sense of 'go over', 'choose', or 'consider carefully'.

Academic consensus holds that between 50% and 90% of languages spoken at the beginning of the 21st century will probably have become extinct by the year 2100.

The MacMillan Encyclopedia of Religions states:

The very attempt to define religion, to find some distinctive or possibly unique essence or set of qualities that distinguish the religious from the remainder of human life, is primarily a Western concern.

Modern research has turned to investigate the internet's downsides, including disinformation, polarization, hate speech, and propaganda.

However, this view does not ensure general objectivity since historians have to interpret and synthesize facts to arrive at an overall narrative describing large trends and developments.

The Founding Fathers of the United States, who included Washington, Jefferson, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, James Madison, Thomas Paine, and many others, were inspired by Classical, Renaissance, and Enlightenment philosophies and ideas.

Metaphysics is sometimes divided into general metaphysics and specific or special metaphysics.

This use of polished stone axes increased greatly in the Neolithic but was originally used in the preceding Mesolithic in some areas such as Ireland.

This perspective has been challenged by other researchers, who have pointed out high mortality rates and perennial warfare in hunter-gatherer societies.

This approach to the foundations of mathematics was challenged during the first half of the 20th century by mathematicians led by Brouwer, who promoted intuitionistic logic (which explicitly lacks the law of excluded middle).

It often does not result in straightforward answers but may help a person to better understand the topic, examine their life, dispel confusion, and overcome prejudices and self-deceptive ideas associated with common sense.

While the outward signs of masculinity look different in different cultures, there are some common aspects to its definition across cultures.

Graph theory and hypergraphs
Coding theory, including error correcting codes and a part of cryptography
Matroid theory
Discrete geometry
Discrete probability distributions
Game theory (although continuous games are also studied, most common games, such as chess and poker are discrete)
Discrete optimization, including combinatorial optimization, integer programming, constraint programming


=== Mathematical logic and set theory ===

The two subjects of mathematical logic and set theory have belonged to mathematics since the end of the 19th century.

Working conditions in factories are generally restrictive and harsh.

Sacred things are not, however, limited to gods or spirits.

Richard Niebuhr's (1894–1962) five-fold classification of the relationship between Christ and culture, however, indicates that religion and culture can be seen as two separate systems, though with some interplay.

Many of its philosophical issues overlap with the fields of metaphysics or epistemology.

Psychologists have also been using literature as a therapeutic tool.

The way in which meaningful elements can be combined within a language is governed by rules.

=== Immigration ===

America's immigrant population is by far the world's largest in absolute terms.

Genetics provides key information about the evolutionary origins of humans as a species, human migration, ancestry, and demographic changes.

He did not compose for traditional ensembles.

Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington increased its popularity early in the 20th century.

In recent works, adaptation energy is considered an internal coordinate on the "dominant path" in the model of adaptation.

These activities include painting, sculpting, music, theatre, literature, and more.

Encyclopædia Britannica.

The absence of written documents from this period presents researchers with unique challenges.

The P versus NP problem, which remains open to this day, is also important for discrete mathematics, since its solution would potentially impact a large number of computationally difficult problems.

Commonly identified aspects include pitch (which governs melody and harmony), duration (including rhythm and tempo), intensity (including dynamics), and timbre.

Total strength of the entire military is about 1.3 million active duty with an additional 400,000 in reserve.

Regarding religion and science, Albert Einstein states (1940): "For science can only ascertain what is, but not what should be, and outside of its domain value judgments of all kinds remain necessary.

The United States has a higher percentage of low-income workers than almost any other developed country, largely because of a weak collective bargaining system and lack of government support for at-risk workers.

Moreover, this means cultural differences within agrarian societies are greater than differences between them.

Some 5,193 are designated as "public use", including for general aviation.

The distinction should be made that "brain death" cannot be equated with one in a vegetative state or coma, in that the former situation describes a state that is beyond recovery.

Medieval Japan at first had a similar union between imperial law and universal or Buddha law, but these later became independent sources of power.

Thus, languages must have a vocabulary of signs related to specific meaning.

From birth, newborns respond more readily to human speech than to other sounds.

This happened despite the widespread destruction caused by two world wars, which rebalanced international power relations by undermining European dominance.

Non-fiction can fall within the broad category of literature as "any collection of written work", but some works fall within the narrower definition "by virtue of the excellence of their writing, their originality and their general aesthetic and artistic merits".

=== Copyright ===

Copyright is a type of intellectual property that gives its owner the exclusive right to make copies of a creative work, usually for a limited time.

Other notable faiths include Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, New Age, and Native American religions.

Religious beliefs, myths, dogmas and legends are the representations that express the nature of these sacred things, and the virtues and powers which are attributed to them.

The industry peaked in what is commonly referred to as the "Golden Age of Hollywood", from the early sound period until the early 1960s, with screen actors such as John Wayne and Marilyn Monroe becoming iconic figures.

Religions have sacred histories, narratives, and mythologies, preserved in oral traditions, sacred texts, symbols, and holy places, that may attempt to explain the origin of life, the universe, and other phenomena.

The subsequent classical period started roughly 200 BCE and was characterized by the emergence of the six orthodox schools of Hinduism: Nyāyá, Vaiśeṣika, Sāṃkhya, Yoga, Mīmāṃsā, and Vedanta.

The basic statements are not subject to proof because they are self-evident (postulates), or are part of the definition of the subject of study (axioms).

However, in practice, mathematicians are typically grouped with scientists, and mathematics shares much in common with the physical sciences.

=== Dance ===

Dance generally refers to human movement, either used as a form of expression or presented in a social, spiritual, or performance setting.

A retrospective analyses of people infected with the common cold found that doctors underrate the symptoms of men, and are more willing to attribute symptoms and illness to women than men.

This view was supplanted after discovering evidence of tool use among chimpanzees and other primates, dolphins, and crows.

These scholars tended to use a more creative style and sometimes challenged orthodox accounts.

It entered the English language during the Late Middle English period through French and Latin.

==== Donations ====
The problem of defining death is especially imperative as it pertains to the dead donor rule, which could be understood as one of the following interpretations of the rule: there must be an official declaration of death in a person before starting organ procurement, or that organ procurement cannot result in the death of the donor.

In north Africa, these traditions include Berber and ancient Egyptian.

It is based on the idea that beliefs require some kind of reason or evidence to be justified.

In other international competition, the United States is the home of a number of prestigious events, including the America's Cup, World Baseball Classic, the U.S. Open, and the Masters Tournament.

Measures of technological innovation correlates with a rise in greenhouse gas emissions.

Cantor's work offended many mathematicians not only by considering actually infinite sets but by showing that this implies different sizes of infinity, per Cantor's diagonal argument.

These theories define what they present as universal characteristics of religious belief and practice.

The Greek word threskeia, which was used by Greek writers such as Herodotus and Josephus, is found in the New Testament.

Another example is Goldbach's conjecture, which asserts that every even integer greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers.

Every U.S. congressional district is of equivalent population and sends one representative to Congress.

=== Grammar ===

Grammar is the study of how meaningful elements called morphemes within a language can be combined into utterances.

In practice, the two often overlap.

The Cascade and Sierra Nevada mountain ranges run close to the Pacific coast.

Around the turn of the 20th century, thinkers began to wonder about the role of language in shaping our experiences of the world – asking whether language simply reflects the objective structure of the world, or whether it creates concepts that in turn impose structure on our experience of the objective world.

Proponents of the idea that modern-day global society is an information society posit that information technologies are impacting most important forms of social organization, including education, economy, health, government, warfare, and levels of democracy.

=== Environmental ===
Technology can have both positive and negative effects on the environment.

We just know that it is done, annually, weekly, daily, for some people almost hourly; and we have an enormous ethnographic literature to demonstrate it.

Also, larger areas such as South Asia, Europe, and Southeast Asia have sometimes been considered language areas because of the widespread diffusion of specific areal features.

Scientific knowledge is based on empirical evidence but it is often not clear whether empirical observations are neutral or already include theoretical assumptions.

Closely related issues include the style and rhetorical presentation of works of history.

The Coast Guard is administered by the Department of Homeland Security in peacetime and can be transferred to the Department of the Navy in wartime.

It seems that the key to long-term success—and many movements come and go with little long-term effect—has relatively little to do with the prophets, who appear with surprising regularity, but more to do with the development of a group of supporters who are able to institutionalize the movement."

Lacrosse and surfing arose from Native American and Native Hawaiian activities that predate European contact.

Unitarian Universalism is a religion characterized by support for a free and responsible search for truth and meaning, and has no accepted creed or theology.

The production of spoken language depends on sophisticated capacities for controlling the lips, tongue and other components of the vocal apparatus, the ability to acoustically decode speech sounds, and the neurological apparatus required for acquiring and producing language.

To what extent masculinity is biologically or socially influenced is subject to debate.

Robert W. Connell, Masculinities, Cambridge: Polity Press, 1995.

== See also ==


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== Sources ===


== Further reading ==
Gribbin, John, "Alone in the Milky Way: Why we are probably the only intelligent life in the galaxy", Scientific American, vol.

Diophantus solved some equations involving unknown natural numbers by deducing new relations until he obtained the solution.

Universals, like the color red, can exist at different locations at the same time.

The Pythagoreans were likely the first to constrain the use of the word to just the study of arithmetic and geometry.

Art photography stands in contrast to photojournalism, which provides a visual account of news events, and commercial photography, the primary focus of which is to advertise products or services.

Though Taiwan does not have formal diplomatic relations with the U.S., it maintains close unofficial relations.

The Metropolitan Museum of Art in Manhattan is the largest art museum in the United States and the fourth-largest in the world.

== Related aspects ==


=== Law ===

The study of law and religion is a relatively new field, with several thousand scholars involved in law schools, and academic departments including political science, religion, and history since 1980.

The American Revolutionary Period (1765–1783) is notable for the political writings of Benjamin Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, Thomas Paine, and Thomas Jefferson.

Shwetambara Jainism (or white-clad) is mainly practiced in Western India.

Public history takes place in locations like museums and memorial sites, where selected artefacts are often used to tell specific stories.

Many works of early periods, even in narrative form, had a covert moral or didactic purpose, such as the Sanskrit Panchatantra (200 BC – 300 AD), based on older oral tradition.

It is in Babylonian mathematics that elementary arithmetic (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) first appear in the archaeological record.

as mathematical objects, and to prove theorems about them.

Other achievements of the Islamic period include advances in spherical trigonometry and the addition of the decimal point to the Arabic numeral system.

Western powers established vast colonial empires, gaining superiority through industrialized military technology.

This branch of philosophy encompassed a wide range of fields, including disciplines like physics, chemistry, and biology.

Cultural and regional traditions often influence men's fashion, resulting in diverse styles and garments that reflect the unique characteristics of different parts of the world.

Other works in the late 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries have fused other disciplines in creative ways, such as performance art.

One of its central topics is to understand how sentences get their meaning.

Vespucci first proposed that the West Indies discovered by Christopher Columbus in 1492 were part of a previously unknown landmass and not among the Indies at the eastern limit of Asia.

The medieval usage alternates with order in designating bonded communities like those of monastic orders: "we hear of the 'religion' of the Golden Fleece, of a knight 'of the religion of Avys'."

At the same time, it offers new possibilities by presenting information that was not recorded, allowing historians to access the past of non-literate societies and marginalized groups within literate societies by studying the remains of their material culture.

Immediately, the Redeemers began evicting the Carpetbaggers and quickly regained local control of Southern politics in the name of white supremacy.

From 1983 to 2008, U.S. real compounded annual GDP growth was 3.3%, compared to a 2.3% weighted average for the rest of the G7.

The results suggested "that it may not be appropriate to generalize findings about the relationship between spirituality/religiosity and health from one form of spirituality/religiosity to another, across denominations, or to assume effects are uniform for men and women.

Some examples of particularly elegant results included are Euclid's proof that there are infinitely many prime numbers and the fast Fourier transform for harmonic analysis.

Depending on the selected context and level of detail, a period may be as short as a decade or longer than several centuries.

Typically, this process begins with external criticism, which evaluates the authenticity of a source.

About 800 publications are produced in Spanish.

Some types of pseudoscience, such as numerology and astrology, were not then clearly distinguished from mathematics.

This structuralist view of language was first introduced by Ferdinand de Saussure, and his structuralism remains foundational for many approaches to language.

Suspension of consciousness must be permanent and not transient, as occurs during certain sleep stages, and especially a coma.

=== Language endangerment ===

Language endangerment occurs when a language is at risk of falling out of use as its speakers die out or shift to speaking another language.

The later part of the ancient period was marked by the emergence of philosophical movements, for example, Epicureanism, Stoicism, Skepticism, and Neoplatonism.

One way this difference of viewpoint plays out is in the philosophical debate as to whether mathematical results are created (as in art) or discovered (as in science).

The United States has a smaller welfare state and redistributes less income through government action than most other high-income countries.

The essay resonated with a large part of the American public.

In the 19th century, mathematicians such as Karl Weierstrass and Richard Dedekind increasingly focused their research on internal problems, that is, pure mathematics.

The origin of religious belief is an open question, with possible explanations including awareness of individual death, a sense of community, and dreams.

Anthropologists John Monoghan and Peter Just state that, "it seems apparent that one thing religion or belief helps us do is deal with problems of human life that are significant, persistent, and intolerable.

Even among speakers of one language, several different ways of using the language exist, and each is used to signal affiliation with particular subgroups within a larger culture.

Hallucinations and delusions related to religious content occurs in about 60% of people with schizophrenia.

Noahidism is a monotheistic ideology based on the Seven Laws of Noah, and on their traditional interpretations within Rabbinic Judaism.

In English, for example, the words bat [bæt] and pat [pʰæt] form a minimal pair, in which the distinction between /b/ and /p/ differentiates the two words, which have different meanings.

Among the main proponents of this theory of religion are Daniel Dubuisson, Timothy Fitzgerald, Talal Asad, and Jason Ānanda Josephson.

The form of linguistic expression often does not correspond to the meaning that it actually has in a social context.

Scientific theories that have an overwhelming preponderance of favorable evidence are often treated as de facto verities in general parlance, such as the theories of general relativity and natural selection to explain respectively the mechanisms of gravity and evolution.

This meaning is implied by the context in which it is spoken; these kinds of effects of meaning are called conversational implicatures.

Both candidates are elected together, or defeated together, in a presidential election.

This set of rules is called Universal Grammar; for Chomsky, describing it is the primary objective of the discipline of linguistics.

This results in two distinct subcultures; the urban elite versus the peasant masses.

Hesiod's Works and Days (c.700 BC) and Theogony are some of the earliest and most influential works of ancient Greek literature.

Other symptoms that may be present in expressive aphasia include problems with word repetition.

Because all languages have a very large number of words, no purely logographic scripts are known to exist.

In the 20th century, traditional historical assumptions and practices were challenged while the scope of historical research broadened.

For example, they examine the characteristics of the Annales school, like its use of quantitative data from various disciplines and its interest in economic and social developments taking place over extended periods.

Once the information content of a source is understood, internal criticism is specifically interested in determining accuracy.

== Demographics ==


=== Population ===

The U.S. Census Bureau reported 331,449,281 residents on April 1, 2020, making the United States the third-most-populous country in the world, after China and India.

== See also ==

Glossary of history
Outline of history


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Citations ===


=== Sources ===


== External links ==
Internet History Sourcebooks Project See also Internet History Sourcebooks Project (Collections of public domain and copy-permitted historical texts for educational use)

The arts, or creative arts, are a vast range of human practices involving creative expression, storytelling, and cultural participation.

Some philosophers engage in most of their theorizing using one particular method while others employ a wider range of methods based on which one fits the specific problem investigated best.

The United States emerged as a pioneer of the automotive industry.

Scholars in the field are not only focused on strictly legal issues about religious freedom or non-establishment, but also study religions as they are qualified through judicial discourses or legal understanding of religious phenomena.

The soul exits this body when the body can no longer sustain the conscious self (life), which may be due to mental or physical reasons or, more accurately, the inability to act on one's kama (material desires).

In early history, distribution of political power was determined by the availability of fresh water, fertile soil, and temperate climate of different locations.

Most of the continent was colonized by European powers in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

=== History of the concept of "religion" ===

Religion is a modern concept and not a universal concept across history, cultures or languages.

They were accompanied by consequential social change, with the introduction of skyscrapers accompanied by rapid urbanization.

Many variables determine judgement of art, such as aesthetics, cognition, or perception.

=== Formal symbolic system ===
Another definition sees language as a formal system of signs governed by grammatical rules of combination to communicate meaning.

==== History of "nonreligion" and "secular" ====
Accordingly, other concepts like the "secular", "nonreligion", and "atheism" have been called into question since they are, like religion, not universal concepts as they are not found in many other cultures.

One form is inductive reasoning.

== Education ==

Arts in education is a field of educational research and practice informed by investigations into learning through arts experiences.

Recent interfaith initiatives include A Common Word, launched in 2007 and focused on bringing Muslim and Christian leaders together, the "C1 World Dialogue", the Common Ground initiative between Islam and Buddhism, and a United Nations sponsored "World Interfaith Harmony Week".

In China during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), public interest in historical writings and their availability also increased.

Independence movements in the 18th and 19th centuries led to the formation of new nations across the Americas.

This differs greatly from practices in nearly all other countries, where publicly and privately funded sports organizations serve this function.

Modern Death: How Medicine Changed the End of Life.

Renaissance humanists used sophisticated text criticism to scrutinize earlier religious historical works, which contributed to the secularization of historical writing.

== Aspects ==


=== Beliefs ===

The origin of religious belief is an open question, with possible explanations including awareness of individual death, a sense of community, and dreams.

Numerical analysis broadly includes the study of approximation and discretization, with special focus on rounding errors.

Systematic African philosophy emerged at the beginning of the 20th century.

Phenomenologists seek knowledge of the realm of appearance and the structure of human experience.

Other notable developments of Indian mathematics include the modern definition and approximation of sine and cosine, and an early form of infinite series.

The District of Columbia is a federal district containing the U.S. capital, Washington, D.C.

Word order type is relevant as a typological parameter, because basic word order type corresponds with other syntactic parameters, such as the relative order of nouns and adjectives, or of the use of prepositions or postpositions.

This invention gradually made books less expensive to produce and more widely available.

The increasing influence of Western thought and institutions in the 19th and 20th centuries gave rise to the intellectual movement of Islamic modernism, which aims to understand the relation between traditional Islamic beliefs and modernity.

They also include historical remains examined in archaeology, geology, and the medical sciences, such as artefacts and fossils unearthed from excavations.

As a result, they do not build permanent villages or create a wide variety of artifacts.

Today there are about 13 million Jews, about 40 per cent living in Israel and 40 per cent in the United States.

== Characteristics ==


=== Norms and roles ===
Social norms are shared standards of acceptable behavior by groups.

John Cage is regarded by many as a performance artist rather than a composer, although he preferred the latter term.

88.)

On average, the Supreme Court receives about 7,000 appeals petitions for writs of certiorari each year, but only grants about 80.

According to a study from 2015, Christians hold the largest amount of wealth (55% of the total world wealth), followed by Muslims (5.8%), Hindus (3.3%) and Jews (1.1%).

It placed great importance on the chain of transmission to preserve the authority of historical accounts.

Armand Borel summarized this view of mathematics reality as follows, and provided quotations of G. H. Hardy, Charles Hermite, Henri Poincaré and Albert Einstein that support his views.

Election years for senators are staggered so that only one-third of them will be up for election every two years.

=== Stillbirth ===

Stillbirth can happen right before or after the delivery of a fetus.

Because the language of mathematics is so precise, it is ideally suited to defining concepts for which such a consensus exists.

The four last things: death, judgment, hell, heaven.

Some theories are based on the idea that language is so complex that one cannot imagine it simply appearing from nothing in its final form, but that it must have evolved from earlier pre-linguistic systems among our pre-human ancestors.

For example, the natural numbers and arithmetic were introduced for the need of counting, and geometry was motivated by surveying, architecture, and astronomy.

It makes it possible to store large amounts of information outside of the human body and retrieve it again, and it allows communication across physical distances and timespans that would otherwise be impossible.

For example, the prevailing medieval style of woodworking and primitive sculpture became integral to early American folk art, despite the emergence of Renaissance styles in England in the late 16th and early 17th centuries.

Of the world's 500 largest companies by revenue, 138 were headquartered in the U.S. in 2025, the highest number of any country.

By controlling the different parts of the speech apparatus, the airstream can be manipulated to produce different speech sounds.

Generally such bodies attempt to ban works for political reasons, or because they deal with other controversial matters such as race, or sex.

Within contemporary normative ethics, consequentialism, deontology, and virtue ethics are influential schools of thought.

Before this period, sets were not considered to be mathematical objects, and logic, although used for mathematical proofs, belonged to philosophy and was not specifically studied by mathematicians.

On average, men are taller than women by about 10%.

In medicine, philosophical considerations related to bioethics affect issues like whether an embryo is already a person and under what conditions abortion is morally permissible.

According to this theory, the most basic form of language is a set of syntactic rules that is universal for all humans and which underlies the grammars of all human languages.

=== Ethics ===

Ethics, also known as moral philosophy, studies what constitutes right conduct.

JSTOR 409603.

sounds, letters or gestures) can be combined to form an infinite number of larger units of meaning (words and sentences).

== Gender symbol ==

The Mars symbol (♂) is a common symbol that represents the male sex.

=== Political parties ===

The Constitution is silent on political parties.

"How One Photographer Overcame His Fear of Death by Photographing It (Walter Schels' Life Before Death)".

During the Great Migration, millions of African Americans left the rural South for urban areas in the North.

It is generally agreed that Sumerian writing was an independent invention; however, it is debated whether Egyptian writing was developed completely independently of Sumerian, or was a case of cultural diffusion.

== Philosophy ==


=== Reality ===
The connection between mathematics and material reality has led to philosophical debates since at least the time of Pythagoras.

It seeks to understand how humans and the rest of nature have affected each other in the course of history.

Modern pagan movements attempting to reconstruct or revive ancient pagan practices, such as Heathenry, Hellenism, Roman Traditionalism, and Kemeticism.

They can change their accidental features but they cease to be the same entity if they lose an essential feature.

Rather than seeing death as the end of life, Muslims consider death as a continuation of life in another form.

Western Vernacular literature includes the Poetic Edda and the sagas, or heroic epics, of Iceland, the Anglo-Saxon Beowulf, and the German Song of Hildebrandt.

One prominent conflict theorist is Karl Marx who conceived of society as operating on an economic "base" with a "superstructure" of government, family, religion and culture.

His book, Elements, is widely considered the most successful and influential textbook of all time.

A primary source is a source that originated during the period that is studied.

As gunpowder empires, they explored and colonized large parts of the world.

Larger societies with larger food surpluses often exhibit stratification or dominance patterns.

Hindu reform movements, such as Ayyavazhi, Swaminarayan Faith and Ananda Marga, are examples of new religious movements within Indian religions.

=== Change ===

All languages change as speakers adopt or invent new ways of speaking and pass them on to other members of their speech community.

The United States is home to 428 mammal species, 784 birds, 311 reptiles, 295 amphibians, and around 91,000 insect species.

There are massive inequalities in the division of wealth among humans; as of 2018 in China, Europe, and the United States, the richest tenth of humans hold more than seven-tenths of those regions' total wealth.

From the mid-18th century onwards, there was an upsurge in the public's fear of being mistakenly buried alive and much debate about the uncertainty of the signs of death.

Only in transitive sentences would the equivalent of the pronoun "I" be used.

A bathtub virtually identical to modern ones was unearthed at the Palace of Knossos.

In physics, the discovery of nuclear fission in the Atomic Age led to both nuclear weapons and nuclear power.

Mathematical anxiety can develop due to various factors such as parental and teacher attitudes, social stereotypes, and personal traits.

A notable example of censorship is James Joyce's novel Ulysses, which has been described by Russian-American novelist Vladimir Nabokov as a "divine work of art" and the greatest masterpiece of 20th century prose.

For example, spoken language uses the auditive modality, whereas sign languages and writing use the visual modality, and braille writing uses the tactile modality.

10 (2): 117–129.

It shows how they overlap while also delimiting their scope.

Specialists have explored themes in Western history regarding Christianity and justice and mercy, rule and equity, and discipline and love.

Tylor and J.G.

Death is part of several key Buddhist tenets, such as the Four Noble Truths and dependent origination.

It examines the concepts of meaning, reference, and truth.

=== Post-industrial ===

Post-industrial societies are societies dominated by information and services, rather than the production of goods.

==== Cognitive science ====

Cognitive science of religion is the study of religious thought and behavior from the perspective of the cognitive and evolutionary sciences.

Literary works are defined by copyright law to mean "any work, other than a dramatic or musical work, which is written, spoken or sung, and accordingly includes (a) a table or compilation (other than a database), (b) a computer program, (c) preparatory design material for a computer program, and (d) a database."

As with all other federal judges, the members are appointed for life by the sitting president with Senate approval when a vacancy becomes available.

It is fundamentally the study of the relationship between variables that depend continuously on each other.

A prominent proponent of this view is archaeologist Steven Mithen.

The invention of writing led to the spread of cultural knowledge and became the basis for history, libraries, schools, and scientific research.

Centralized production of goods in factories and a decreased need for agricultural labor leads to urbanization.

The word "social" derives from the Latin word socii ('allies').

Notable cyberpunk works include William Gibson's Neuromancer novel, and movies like Blade Runner, and The Matrix.

In 1975, there was an average of one citation of scientific literature in every three patents granted in the U.S.; by 1989, this increased to an average of one citation per patent.

Religious practice is widespread, among the most diverse in the world, and profoundly vibrant.

Such bimodal use of language is especially common in genres such as story-telling (with Plains Indian Sign Language and Australian Aboriginal sign languages used alongside oral language, for example), but also occurs in mundane conversation.

However, they are considered separate academic disciplines in the modern sense of the term.

At an elevation of 20,310 feet (6,190.5 m), Alaska's Denali (also called Mount McKinley) is the highest peak in the country and on the continent.

Nevertheless, the concept of "rigor" may remain useful for teaching to beginners what is a mathematical proof.

One important way in which religious beliefs accomplish this is by providing a set of ideas about how and why the world is put together that allows people to accommodate anxieties and deal with misfortune."

Some cultures have developed over time toward more complex forms of organization and control.

Asian Americans are the country's fourth-largest group, composing 5.9% of the United States population.

The Vedas are among the oldest sacred texts.

But while generally women are absent from the European canon of Romantic literature, there is one notable exception, the French novelist and memoirist Amantine Dupin (1804 – 1876) best known by her pen name George Sand.

It covers foreign policy topics such as negotiations, strategic considerations, treaties, and conflicts between nations as well as the role of international organizations in these processes.

This can include measures to halt pollution through environmental regulations, capture and storage of pollution, or using pollutant byproducts in other industries.

The following, by the British author William Boyd on the short story, might be applied to all prose fiction:

[short stories] seem to answer something very deep in our nature as if, for the duration of its telling, something special has been created, some essence of our experience extrapolated, some temporary sense has been made of our common, turbulent journey towards the grave and oblivion.

Even though the beliefs and traditions of Judaism are found in the ancient world, ancient Jews saw Jewish identity as being about an ethnic or national identity and did not entail a compulsory belief system or regulated rituals.

Islamic art avoids the representation of living beings, particularly humans and other animals, in religious contexts.

Both a dynamic and characteristically constant feature of human life, the arts have developed into increasingly stylized and intricate forms.

Brain death was then considered a more fitting option, but several definitions exist for this: some people believe that all brain functions must cease; others believe that even if the brainstem is still alive, the personality and identity are irretrievably lost, so therefore the person should be considered entirely dead.

Philosophers use a great variety of methods to arrive at philosophical knowledge.

in that many presumed parts of philosophy would not deserve the title "philosophy" if they were true.

Opponents of circumcision describe it as a human rights violation.

History emerged as a field of inquiry in antiquity to replace myth-infused narratives, with influential early traditions originating in Greece, China, and later in the Islamic world.

Insights and approaches from various branches of philosophy are relevant to this endeavour, such as metaphysics, epistemology, hermeneutics, and ethics.

In the Americas, some of the largest language families include the Quechua, Arawak, and Tupi-Guarani families of South America, the Uto-Aztecan, Oto-Manguean, and Mayan of Mesoamerica, and the Na-Dene, Iroquoian, and Algonquian language families of North America.

Those who see language as being mostly innate, such as psychologist Steven Pinker, hold the precedents to be animal cognition, whereas those who see language as a socially learned tool of communication, such as psychologist Michael Tomasello, see it as having developed from animal communication in primates: either gestural or vocal communication to assist in cooperation.

Lenski differentiates between horticultural and agrarian societies by the use of the plow.

Some biologists, including entomologist E.O.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==

Kevin Schilbrack.

Theravada Buddhism, which is practiced mainly in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia alongside folk religion, shares some characteristics of Indian religions.

Discrete geometry, the study of finite configurations in geometry.

The tide of modernism and then postmodernism has brought global fame to American architects, including Frank Lloyd Wright, Philip Johnson, and Frank Gehry.

All these symbols are generally grouped according to specific rules to form expressions and formulas.

While most major U.S. sports such as baseball and American football have evolved out of European practices, basketball, volleyball, skateboarding, and snowboarding are American inventions, many of which have become popular worldwide.

Australian Aboriginal religions.

One type of mixed language called pidgins occurs when adult speakers of two different languages interact on a regular basis, but in a situation where neither group learns to speak the language of the other group fluently.

Art criticism and appreciation can be subjective based on personal preference toward aesthetics and form, or on the elements and principles of design and by social and cultural acceptance.

Communication systems used by other animals such as bees or apes are closed systems that consist of a finite, usually very limited, number of possible ideas that can be expressed.

Other denominations of Islam include Nation of Islam, Ibadi, Sufism, Quranism, Mahdavia, Ahmadiyya and non-denominational Muslims.

It emerged as a discipline over the past two centuries, and has grown "considerably" since the 1970s.

==== Oratory ====
Oratory or the art of public speaking was considered a literary art for a significant period of time.

These movements share almost nothing in common except the place of their founding.

BenBest.com.

Making up more than a third of global military spending, the country has one of the strongest militaries and is a designated nuclear state.

The U.S. works closely with its NATO allies on military and national security issues, and with countries in the Americas through the Organization of American States and the United States–Mexico–Canada Free Trade Agreement.

600 BC).

According to some naturalistic philosophers, such as W. V. O. Quine, philosophy is an empirical yet abstract science that is concerned with wide-ranging empirical patterns instead of particular observations.

For periods before the modern era, available data is often limited, forcing economic historians to rely on scarce sources and extrapolate information from them.

"Hindu" has historically been used as a geographical, cultural, and later religious identifier for people indigenous to the Indian subcontinent.

Sanskrit literature begins with the Vedas, dating back to 1500–1000 BC, and continues with the Sanskrit Epics of Iron Age India.

For example, in lieu of a definition, Saunders Mac Lane in Mathematics, form and function summarizes the basics of several areas of mathematics, emphasizing their inter-connectedness, and observes:

the development of Mathematics provides a tightly connected network of formal rules, concepts, and systems.

Hunter-gatherer tribes have, at times, settled around seasonal food stocks to become agrarian villages.

Sachs, Jessica Snyder (2001).

According to the World Economic Forum's "The Future of Jobs Report 2020", AI is predicted to replace 85 million jobs worldwide, and create 97 million new jobs by 2025.

Rulers of agrarian societies often do not manage their empire for the common good or in the name of the public interest, but as property they own.

{\displaystyle \Omega ^{-}.}

Such words are, for example, the word, "I" (which designates the person speaking), "now" (which designates the moment of speaking), and "here" (which designates the position of speaking).

"; "What should I do?

In the post-archaic period, the Mississippian cultures were located in the midwestern, eastern, and southern regions, and the Algonquian in the Great Lakes region and along the Eastern Seaboard, while the Hohokam culture and Ancestral Puebloans inhabited the Southwest.

The choice of one's method usually has important implications both for how philosophical theories are constructed and for the arguments cited for or against them.

Selye assumed that adaptability is a finite supply presented at birth.

More advanced history education encountered in secondary school covers a broader spectrum of topics, ranging from ancient to modern history, at both local and global levels.

This consensus echoes a traditional Jewish view which gives Ezra, the leader of the Jewish community on its return from Babylon, a pivotal role in its promulgation.

Meanwhile, inter-regional trade networks flourished, leading to increased technological and cultural exchange.

Historians debate whether history is a social science or forms part of the humanities.

Beginning with South Carolina, 11 slave-state governments voted to secede from the United States in 1861, joining to create the Confederate States of America.

Marxists interpret historical developments as expressions of economic forces and class struggles.

Other approaches include the assessment of the influences of the author's intentions and prejudices, and cross-referencing information with other credible sources.

Various suggestions were made to test for signs of life before burial, ranging from pouring vinegar and pepper into the corpse's mouth to applying red hot pokers to the feet or into the rectum.

Architectural design usually must address feasibility and cost for the builder, as well as function and aesthetics for the user.

Formal theories of grammar seek to define the different elements of language and describe the way they relate to each other as systems of formal rules or operations, while functional theories seek to define the functions performed by language and then relate them to the linguistic elements that carry them out.

Following the work of Leopold von Ranke, a systematic method of source criticism was widely accepted while academic institutions dedicated to history were established in the form of university departments, professional associations, and journals.

The concept was invented recently in the English language and is found in texts from the 17th century due to events such as the splitting of Christendom during the Protestant Reformation and globalization in the Age of Exploration, which involved contact with numerous foreign cultures with non-European languages.

The Hindu–Arabic numeral system and the rules for the use of its operations, in use throughout the world today, evolved over the course of the first millennium AD in India and were transmitted to the Western world via Islamic mathematics.

The Qur'an (610 AD to 632 AD), the main holy book of Islam, had a significant influence on the Arab language, and marked the beginning of Islamic literature.

Third-stage philosophers like Don Ihde and Albert Borgmann represent a turn toward de-generalization and empiricism, and considered how humans can learn to live with technology.

Young bear cubs in the Yellowstone National Park only have a 40% chance to survive to adulthood from other bears and predators.

Influenced by the Chinese model, a tradition of historical writing emerged in Japan in the 8th century CE.

(p.

The practice began to be significantly questioned during the American Revolution,  and spurred by an active abolitionist movement that had reemerged in the 1830s, states in the North enacted laws to prohibit slavery within their boundaries.

It is predated in use by the Ancient Greek word τέχνη (tékhnē), used to mean 'knowledge of how to make things', which encompassed activities like architecture.

The language making process is dynamic and subject to change over time.

Ibn Khaldun reflected on philosophical issues underlying the practice of historians, such as universal patterns shaping historical changes and the limits of historical truth.

Muslims believe death to be wholly natural and predetermined by God.

American chefs have had a significant impact on society both domestically and internationally.

Throughout human history, traditional gender roles have often defined men's activities and opportunities.

== Senescence ==

Senescence refers to a scenario when a living being can survive all calamities but eventually dies due to causes relating to old age.

It is particularly interested in academic fields but not limited to them, including the study of the beliefs and prejudices of ordinary people.

This political aspect of history education may spark disputes about which topics school textbooks should cover.

Political philosophy is the philosophical inquiry into the fundamental principles and ideas governing political systems and societies.

However, rates of violence vary widely according to societal norms, and rates of homicide in societies that have legal systems and strong cultural attitudes against violence stand at about 0.01%.

In the United States, men are less healthy than women across all social classes.

The fathers' rights movement seeks to support separated fathers that do not receive equal rights to care for their children.

For example, the three-age system is traditionally used to divide early human history into Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron Age based on the predominant materials and technologies during these periods.

A predicate that can only take a single argument is called intransitive, while a predicate that can take two arguments is called transitive.

Sedentary life, in Khaldun's view, was marked by secularization, decreased social cohesion, and increased interest in luxury.

Another methodological tool is the examination of silences, gaps or omissions in the historical record of events that occurred but did not leave significant evidential traces.

It is usually divided into formal and informal logic.

Eugene Onegin (1831) by Alexander Pushkin is the most famous example.

Sima Qian's Records of the Grand Historian, c. 94 BC).

The latter example may be used as a way of placing special emphasis on "who", thereby slightly altering the meaning of the question.

=== Subdisciplines ===
The academic study of language is conducted within many different disciplinary areas and from different theoretical angles, all of which inform modern approaches to linguistics.

Some of the most prominent are aesthetics, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, philosophy of religion, philosophy of science, and political philosophy.

In the study of post-classical or medieval history, which began around 500 CE, historians note the growing influence of major religions.

=== Military ===

The president is the commander-in-chief of the United States Armed Forces and appoints its leaders, the secretary of defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Latter-day Saint movement, founded by Joseph Smith in the late 1820s.

=== Cell death ===


== Death of abiotic factors ==
Some non-living things things can be described as "dead" when they stop functioning or undergo destruction.

== Rights ==

In most societies, men have more legal and cultural rights than women, and misogyny is far more prevalent than misandry in society.

Other studies indicate that religion and nonreligion are not necessarily mutually exclusive experiences since there is overlap in individuals regular lives.

The study of prehistory includes the examination of the evolution of human-like species several million years ago, leading to the emergence of anatomically modern humans about 200,000 years ago.

It is based on rigorous definitions that provide a standard foundation for communication.

Possibly as a result of Aristotle's influence (his Poetics), "poetry" before the 19th century was usually less a technical designation for verse than a normative category of fictive or rhetorical art.

For instance, in Japanese, the general noun classifier for humans is nin (人), and it is used for counting humans, whatever they are called:

san-nin no gakusei (三人の学生) lit.

Christians made up 92% of members of the US Congress, compared with 71% of the general public (in 2014).

Humans commit violence against other humans at a rate comparable to other primates (although humans kill adults at a relatively high rate and have a relatively low rate of infanticide).

But it also investigates practical knowledge, such as knowing how to ride a bicycle, and knowledge by acquaintance, for example, knowing a celebrity personally.

Each of them would analyze a sentence such as this in a different manner.

Twenty-eight states and the United States Virgin Islands have laws that designate English as the sole official language; 19 states and the District of Columbia have no official language.

=== Technological utopianism ===

Technological utopianism refers to the belief that technological development is a moral good, which can and should bring about a utopia, that is, a society in which laws, governments, and social conditions serve the needs of all its citizens.

Accidents and disasters, from nuclear disasters to structural collapses, also claim lives.

Prominent debates have surrounded genetically modified organisms, the use of robotic soldiers, algorithmic bias, and the issue of aligning AI behavior with human values.

These changes resulted in significant increases in economic inequality, slum conditions, and social unrest, creating the environment for labor unions and socialist movements to begin to flourish.

Stars also have a life-span and, therefore, can die.

In terms of Christian theology and ultimate truths, people rely on reason, experience, scripture, and tradition to test and gauge what they experience and what they should believe.

Intellectual history is the history of ideas and studies how concepts, philosophies, and ideologies have evolved.

The areas of the world in which there is the greatest linguistic diversity, such as the Americas, Papua New Guinea, West Africa, and South-Asia, contain hundreds of small language families.

Complex manufacturing and construction techniques and organizations are needed to make and maintain more modern technologies, and entire industries have arisen to develop succeeding generations of increasingly more complex tools.

Others see only weaker family resemblances or contend that it is merely an empty blanket term.

They insist upon the first-personal character of all experience and proceed by suspending theoretical judgments about the external world.

Theories about religion offer various explanations for its origins and workings, including the ontological foundations of religious being and belief.

Jehovah's Witnesses, a non-trinitarian Christian Reformist movement sometimes described as millenarian.

Before Cantor's study of infinite sets, mathematicians were reluctant to consider actually infinite collections, and considered infinity to be the result of endless enumeration.

The most prominent among them were Confucianism and Daoism.

In the nineteenth century some notable individuals include Emily Brontë, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, and Emily Dickinson (see American poetry).

Almost all animals who survive external hazards to their biological functioning eventually die from biological aging, known in life sciences as "senescence."

Specific metaphysics is interested in different kinds of being, the features they have, and how they differ from one another.

The biggest-budget theatrical productions are musicals.

Among other topics, it covers the rational study of reality, knowledge, and values.

Marx argues that the economic base determines the superstructure, and that throughout history, societal change has been driven by conflict between laborers and those who own the means of production.

In Islam, life on earth right now is a short, temporary life and a testing period for every soul.

These definitions also entail different approaches and understandings of language, and they also inform different and often incompatible schools of linguistic theory.

It has a bicameral national legislature composed of the House of Representatives (a lower house based on population) and the Senate (an upper house based on equal representation for each state).

There are also Muslim revivalist movements such as Muwahhidism and Salafism.

The United States hosted the 1994 FIFA World Cup and will co-host, along with Canada and Mexico, the 2026 FIFA World Cup.

In The Descent of Man, naturalist Charles Darwin called this process "an instinctive tendency to acquire an art".

It covers economic aspects such as the use of land, labour, and capital, the supply and demand of goods, the costs and means of production, and the distribution of income and wealth.

For example, the Baháʼí Faith, though often called a new religious movement, claims to be a world religion from the line of major Abrahamic religions, while recognizing the Indo-Iranian traditions (Hinduism, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism).

Today's subareas of geometry include:

Projective geometry, introduced in the 16th century by Girard Desargues, extends Euclidean geometry by adding points at infinity at which parallel lines intersect.

While not settled, the current evidence suggests warlike behavior only became common about 10,000 years ago, and in many regions even more recently.

Permanent French settlements were founded much later along the Great Lakes (Fort Detroit, 1701), the Mississippi River (Saint Louis, 1764) and especially the Gulf of Mexico (New Orleans, 1718).

The Compromise of 1877 is generally considered the end of the Reconstruction era, as it resolved the electoral crisis following the 1876 presidential election and led President Rutherford B. Hayes to reduce the role of federal troops in the South.

Humanism also emerged in this period.

==== Functionalism ====

According to the functionalist school of thought, individuals in society work together like organs in the body to create emergent behavior, sometimes referred to as collective consciousness.

Political history has been studied since antiquity by historians such as Herodotus and Thucydides, making it one of the oldest branches of history, while other major subfields have only become established branches in the past century.

A forensic autopsy is carried out when the cause of death may be a criminal matter, while a clinical or academic autopsy is performed to find the medical cause of death and is used in cases of unknown or uncertain death, or for research purposes.

Mid-20th-century American pop stars, such as Frank Sinatra and Elvis Presley, became global celebrities and best-selling music artists, as have artists of the late 20th century, such as Michael Jackson, Madonna, Whitney Houston, and Mariah Carey, and of the early 21st century, such as Eminem, Britney Spears, Lady Gaga, Katy Perry, Taylor Swift and Beyoncé.

The United States annexed the Republic of Texas in 1845, and the 1846 Oregon Treaty led to U.S. control of the present-day American Northwest.

Contrarily, some modern scholars such as Tom Harpur and Joseph Campbell have argued that religiō is derived from religare: re (meaning 'again') + ligare ('bind' or 'connect'), which was made prominent by St. Augustine following the interpretation given by Lactantius in Divinae institutiones, IV, 28.

=== Psychology (aesthetic, creativity and intuition) ===
The validity of a mathematical theorem relies only on the rigor of its proof, which could theoretically be done automatically by a computer program.

Philosophical ethics addresses such basic questions as "Are moral obligations relative?

Indian philosophy combines the spiritual problem of how to reach enlightenment with the exploration of the nature of reality and the ways of arriving at knowledge.

But from a mythological outlook, whether or not the event actually occurred is unimportant.

=== Grief in animals ===
Animals have sometimes shown grief for their partners or "friends".

The approach allows considering "logics" (that is, sets of allowed deducing rules), theorems, proofs, etc.

Buddhism was founded by Gautama Siddhartha (563–483 BCE), who challenged the Vedic idea of a permanent self and proposed a path to liberate oneself from suffering.

Other fields of ethics have had to contend with technology-related issues, including military ethics, media ethics, and educational ethics.

Satanism is a broad category of religions that, for example, worship Satan as a deity (Theistic Satanism) or use Satan as a symbol of carnality and earthly values (LaVeyan Satanism and The Satanic Temple).

In Buddhist doctrine, death functions as a reminder of the value of having been born as a human being.

Comparative history compares historical phenomena from distinct times, regions, or cultures to examine their similarities and differences.

Some languages, called ergative, Gamilaraay among them, distinguish instead between Agents and Patients.

Because nothing really dies and the temporary material body is always changing, both in this life and the next, death means forgetfulness of one's previous experiences.

The word is also used in reference to non-written works: to "oral literature" and "the literature of preliterate culture".

Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023​, FAO, FAO.

A key skill is historical literacy, the ability to comprehend, critically analyse, and respond to historical claims.

History also plays a central role in so-called historical religions, which base some of their core doctrines on historical events.

Phonemes are abstract units of sound, defined as the smallest units in a language that can serve to distinguish between the meaning of a pair of minimally different words, a so-called minimal pair.

All languages structure sentences into Subject, Verb, and Object, but languages differ in the way they classify the relations between actors and actions.

To find and access primary and secondary sources, historians consult archives, libraries, and museums.

In the past, the adoption of this whole-brain definition was a conclusion of the President's Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research in 1980.

Pro-American elements in Hawaii overthrew the Hawaiian monarchy; the islands were annexed in 1898.

The philosophy of mind studies the nature of mental phenomena and how they are related to the physical world.

'craft, art' and -λογία (-logíā), 'study, knowledge').

=== Language families of the world ===

The world's languages can be grouped into language families consisting of languages that can be shown to have common ancestry.

In Congress, the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 mandated the forcible return to their owners in the South of slaves taking refuge in non-slave states, while the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854 effectively gutted the anti-slavery requirements of the Missouri Compromise.

It discusses topics such as ethnophilosophy, négritude, pan-Africanism, Marxism, postcolonialism, the role of cultural identity, relativism, African epistemology, and the critique of Eurocentrism.

As with pastoral societies, surplus food leads to a more complex division of labor.

In a study published in February 2020, new evidence showed that both Budj Bim and Tower Hill volcanoes erupted between 34,000 and 40,000 years ago.

Death is personified in many cultures, with such symbolic representations as the Grim Reaper, Azrael, the Hindu god Yama, and Father Time.

Psychology of Gender (5th ed.).

In other words, the richer a nation is, the less likely its inhabitants to call themselves religious, whatever this word means to them (Many people identify themselves as part of a religion (not irreligion) but do not self-identify as religious).

The condition affects both spoken and written language.

These include greater muscle mass, greater height, the growth of facial hair and a lower body fat composition.

Others lack such grammatical precision in the oral mode, but supplement it with gesture to convey that information in the sign mode.

Ceramics may also be considered artefacts in archaeology.

In Zoroastrianism, good and evil have distinct sources, with evil trying to destroy the creation of Mazda, and good trying to sustain it.

His contemporary Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel disagreed thoroughly, defining religion as "the Divine Spirit becoming conscious of Himself through the finite spirit."

This continues to gradually heat the earth, causing global warming and climate change.

While the content of courses varies, in the present day nearly all countries teach mathematics to students for significant amounts of time.

According to academic James W. Jones, several studies have discovered "positive correlations between religious belief and practice and mental and physical health and longevity."

Interviews with people dying in hospices, and portraits of them before and shortly after, death.

A closet drama, by contrast, is written to be read rather than to be performed; the meaning of which can be realized fully on the page.

One of its foremost non-legislative functions is the power to investigate and oversee the executive branch.

The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language.

Unlike the earlier road, the Minoan road was completely paved.

It includes a discussion of the cultural, social, and political contexts of art production.

The landowning strata typically combine government, religious, and military institutions to justify and enforce their ownership, and support elaborate patterns of consumption, slavery, serfdom, or peonage is commonly the lot of the primary producer.

The second area is Broca's area, in the posterior inferior frontal gyrus of the dominant hemisphere.

Discrete mathematics is useful in many areas of computer science, such as complexity theory, information theory, and graph theory.

With improved medical capability, dying has become a condition to be managed.

Paintings can be on a wide variety of topics, such as photographic, abstract, narrative, symbolistic (symbolism), emotive (Expressionism), or political in nature (artivism).

Horticulturists use human labor and simple tools to cultivate the land for one or more seasons.

Waves on the sea surface possess translation symmetry: moving one's viewpoint by the distance between wave crests does not change one's view of the sea.

It has similarities to indigenous North American philosophy, which covered themes such as the interconnectedness of all things.

The invention of the polished stone axe was a major advance that allowed large-scale forest clearance and farming.

Within Judaism there are a variety of movements, most of which emerged from Rabbinic Judaism, which holds that God revealed his laws and commandments to Moses on Mount Sinai in the form of both the Written and Oral Torah; historically, this assertion was challenged by various groups.

Music can be divided into genres and subgenres, although the dividing lines and relationships between genres are subtle, open to individual interpretation, and controversial.

== Areas of mathematics ==

Before the Renaissance, mathematics was divided into two main areas: arithmetic, regarding the manipulation of numbers, and geometry, regarding the study of shapes.

Over the next millennia, other notable civilizations and kingdoms formed in Nubia, Axum, Carthage, Ghana, Mali, and Songhay.

Major branches of Protestantism include Anglicanism, Baptists, Calvinism, Lutheranism, and Methodism, though each of these contain many different denominations or groups.

Wilson, categorize humans as eusocial, placing humans with ants in the highest level of sociability on the spectrum of animal ethology, although others disagree.

Statisticians generate data with random sampling or randomized experiments.

Other developments were the establishment of the Silk Road, which facilitated trade and cultural exchange across Eurasia, and the formation of powerful empires, such as the Mongol Empire.

By the mid-20th century, half of all Americans died in a hospital.

When the land becomes barren, horticulturists clear a new plot and leave the old plot to revert to its natural state.

Roman naturalist Pliny the Elder used the term religiō to describe the apparent respect given by elephants to the night sky.

Their holy books are Jain Agamas, written by their Prophet Sthulibhadra.

These doubts are often based on the idea that knowledge requires absolute certainty and that humans are unable to acquire it.

It did not take long to discover that wheeled wagons could be used to carry heavy loads.

Students work with historical sources directly to learn how to analyse and interpret evidence, both individually and in group activities.

Societies can have many different forms of government, various ways of understanding kinship, and different gender roles.

When speakers of different languages interact closely, it is typical for their languages to influence each other.

Villages have grown to become towns and cities.

Common tools are graphite pencils, pen and ink, inked brushes, wax coloured pencils, crayons, charcoals, pastels, and marker pens.

A Rorschach test is a figure invariant by this symmetry, as are butterfly and animal bodies more generally (at least on the surface).

Modern archaeology has been unveiling evidence of the human efforts to preserve and transmit arts and knowledge that depended completely or partially on an oral tradition, across various cultures:

The Judeo-Christian Bible reveals its oral traditional roots; medieval European manuscripts are penned by performing scribes; geometric vases from archaic Greece mirror Homer's oral style.

In the study of the history of Europe, historians describe the arrival of the first anatomically modern humans about 45,000 years ago.

In this way, neuroscientists in the 19th century discovered that two areas in the brain are crucially implicated in language processing.

Exponents look at canon law, natural law, and state law, often in a comparative perspective.

Analysis is further subdivided into real analysis, where variables represent real numbers, and complex analysis, where variables represent complex numbers.

Depending on philosophical perspectives regarding the definition of language and meaning, when used as a general concept, "language" may refer to the cognitive ability to learn and use systems of complex communication, or to describe the set of rules that makes up these systems, or the set of utterances that can be produced from those rules.

Influential developments in 20th-century philosophy were the emergence and application of formal logic, the focus on the role of language as well as pragmatism, and movements in continental philosophy like phenomenology, existentialism, and post-structuralism.

Not only did styles change slowly in early America, but there was a tendency for rural artisans there to continue their traditional forms longer than their urban counterparts did—and far longer than those in Western Europe.

Conversely, premature death can refer to a death that occurs before old age arrives, for example, human death before a person reaches the age of 75.

The classic American diner, a casual restaurant type originally intended for the working class, emerged during the 19th century from converted railroad dining cars made stationary.

Some writing systems use the horizontal axis (left to right as the Latin script or right to left as the Arabic script), while others such as traditional Chinese writing use the vertical dimension (from top to bottom).

In examining history as a process, philosophers explore the basic entities that make up historical phenomena.

Other literary prizes for which all nationalities are eligible include: the Neustadt International Prize for Literature, the Man Booker International Prize, Pulitzer Prize, Hugo Award, Guardian First Book Award and the Franz Kafka Prize.

It is the fact that many mathematical theories (even the "purest") have applications outside their initial object.

The main divisions of Christianity are, according to the number of adherents:

The Catholic Church, led by the Bishop of Rome and the bishops worldwide in communion with him, is a communion of 24 Churches sui iuris, including the Latin Church and 23 Eastern Catholic churches, such as the Maronite Catholic Church.

Increased productivity, as well as the stability caused by improved transportation, leads to decreased mortality and resulting population growth.

However, they developed independently in the 18th century with the Federalist and Anti-Federalist parties.

== Diagnosis ==


=== Definition ===

There are many scientific approaches and various interpretations of the concept.

This act was updated many times, including a major revision in 1976.

Different religions may or may not contain various elements ranging from the divine, sacredness, faith, and a supernatural being or beings.

Unnatural causes of death include suicide and predation.

Starting in the 3rd century CE, the school of Xuanxue emerged.

For example, an octave doubles the frequency and a perfect fifth multiplies it by 
  
    
      
        
          
            3
            2
          
        
      
    
    {\textstyle {\frac {3}{2}}}
  
.

There are disagreements about the precise definition of the term and its meaning has changed throughout the ages.

"United States" and "U.S." are the established terms throughout the U.S. federal government, with prescribed rules.

Fire, fueled with wood and charcoal, allowed early humans to cook their food to increase its digestibility, improving its nutrient value and broadening the number of foods that could be eaten.

== External links ==

"Death" Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
"Death" .

Subsequently, humans migrated out of Africa to populate most of the earth.

National infrastructure, including transcontinental telegraph and railroads, spurred growth in the American frontier.

The idea that philosophy is useful for many aspects of life and society is sometimes rejected.

China, the origin of modern paper making and woodblock printing, produced the world's first print cultures.

Standards of manliness or masculinity vary across different cultures and historical periods.

Georgia O'Keeffe, Marsden Hartley, and others experimented with new and individualistic styles, which would become known as American modernism.

Most discussion of probability centers on the concept of evolutionary fitness.

The modern period began roughly 1800 CE and was shaped by encounters with Western thought.

The earliest known use of wind power is the sailing ship; the earliest record of a ship under sail is that of a Nile boat dating to around 7,000 BCE.

Precise definitions are often only accepted by theorists belonging to a certain philosophical movement and are revisionistic according to Søren Overgaard et al.

Characteristic American dishes such as apple pie, fried chicken, doughnuts, french fries, macaroni and cheese, ice cream, hamburgers, hot dogs, and American pizza derive from the recipes of various immigrant groups.

Secondary modes of language, by which a fundamental mode is conveyed in a different medium, include writing (including braille), sign (in manually coded language), whistling and drumming.

=== Judaism ===

There are a variety of beliefs about the afterlife within Judaism, but none of them contradict the preference for life over death.

In addition to the continuation of the Veritable Records by official governmental historians, non-official works by private scholars flourished.

The modern study of number theory in its abstract form is largely attributed to Pierre de Fermat and Leonhard Euler.

This led to the question of whether philosophical problems are really firstly linguistic problems.

Other influential early schools of thought were Mohism, which developed an early form of altruistic consequentialism, and Legalism, which emphasized the importance of a strong state and strict laws.

Japanese new religions (shinshukyo) is a general category for a wide variety of religious movements founded in Japan since the 19th century.

Most languages have words consisting of several morphemes, but they vary in the degree to which morphemes are discrete units.

332, no.

It starts from an observation and concludes that the best explanation of this observation must be true.

The righteous believers will be welcomed to janna (heaven), and the disbelievers and evildoers will be punished in jahannam (hellfire).

Rebirth as a human being is considered the only state in which one can attain enlightenment.

A specialized theorem that is mainly used to prove another theorem is called a lemma.

Only God knows the exact time of a person's death.

=== Typology and universals ===

Languages can be classified in relation to their grammatical types.

Its practice is characterized by active interaction with reality rather than disengaged examination.

It is similar to how ordinary language philosophy approaches philosophical questions by investigating how ordinary language is used.

=== Music ===

American folk music encompasses numerous music genres, variously known as traditional music, traditional folk music, contemporary folk music, or roots music.

), in industrial societies, labor is mostly focused on processing raw materials into finished products.

Theoretical computer science is considered to be mathematical in nature.

=== Video games ===

Video games are multidisciplinary works that include uncontroversial artistic elements such as visuals and sound, as well as an emergent experience from the nature of their interactivity.

== Methods ==

The historical method is a set of techniques historians use to research and interpret the past, covering the processes of collecting, evaluating, and synthesizing evidence.

Natural disasters kill around 45,000 people annually, although this number can vary from thousands to millions on a per-decade basis.

Historians studying the history of Asia note the arrival of anatomically modern humans around 100,000 years ago.

Language change happens at all levels from the phonological level to the levels of vocabulary, morphology, syntax, and discourse.

Scientology is characterised by scholarship in psychology and behavioral sciences as a scam or a commercial business.

Clothing, adapted from the fur and hides of hunted animals, helped humanity expand into colder regions; humans began to migrate out of Africa around 200 kya, initially moving to Eurasia.

==== Buddhism ====
Buddhism was founded by Siddhartha Gautama in the 5th century BCE.

Writing in 1895, the physician J.C. Ouseley claimed that as many as 2,700 people were buried prematurely each year in England and Wales, although some estimates peg the figure to be closer to 800.

It includes both print and digital writing.

The American fast-food industry developed alongside the nation's car culture.

As a form it may pre-date literacy, with the earliest works being composed within and sustained by an oral tradition; hence it constitutes the earliest example of literature.

Moreover, these technologies have become so complex that entire fields have developed to support them, including engineering, medicine, and computer science; and other fields have become more complex, such as construction, transportation, and architecture.

The idea of lifespan extension is considered and studied as a way for people to live longer.

It is considered the mathematical equivalent of the Nobel Prize.

Following Al-Ghazali and the end of the classical period, the influence of philosophical inquiry waned.

Despite mathematics' concision, rigorous proofs can require hundreds of pages to express, such as the 255-page Feit–Thompson theorem.

The colonial authorities often pursued policies that forced Native Americans to adopt European lifestyles, including conversion to Christianity.

), Handbook of Studies on Men and Masculinities, Sage Publications, 2004.

Stories fuse fictional, supernatural, or otherwise exaggerated characters and circumstances with real emotions and morals as a means of teaching.

=== Reproductive system ===

The internal male genitalia consist of the testicles, which produce sperm, the accessory glands, which produce seminal fluid, the epididymides, which store sperm cells, and the vasa deferentia and ejaculatory ducts, which transfer the mature sperm to the urethra.

Two notable new Buddhist sects are Hòa Hảo and the Navayana (Dalit Buddhist movement), which were developed separately in the 20th century.

=== Writing, literacy and technology ===

Throughout history a number of different ways of representing language in graphic media have been invented.

The physical remains of a person, commonly known as a corpse or body, are usually interred whole or cremated, though among the world's cultures, there are a variety of other methods of mortuary disposal.

=== Cuisine ===

Early settlers were introduced by Native Americans to foods such as turkey, sweet potatoes, corn, squash, and maple syrup.

== History ==
The earliest known recorded name of a man in writing is potentially Kushim, who would have lived sometime between 3400 and 3000 BC in the Sumerian city of Uruk; though his name may have been a title rather than his actual name.

==== Sikhism ====
Sikhism is a panentheistic religion founded on the teachings of Guru Nanak and ten successive Sikh gurus in 15th-century Punjab.

However, a 2017 study on Ardipithecus ramidus challenges this belief.

For example, in the Basque phrase ikusi nauzu, or "you saw me", the past tense auxiliary verb n-au-zu (similar to English "do") agrees with both the subject (you) expressed by the n- prefix, and with the object (me) expressed by the – zu suffix.

==== Conflict theory ====
Conflict theorists take the opposite view, and posit that individuals and social groups or social classes within society interact on the basis of conflict rather than agreement.

Plato maintained that communication is possible because language represents ideas and concepts that exist independently of, and prior to, language.

The mind-body problem is the problem of explaining how these two types of thing—mind and matter—are related.

The 20th century saw a rapid expansion of academic philosophy in terms of the number of philosophical publications and philosophers working at academic institutions.

Human study of economics is a social science that looks at how societies distribute scarce resources among different people.

coal, oil, and nuclear energy), and others continuing to rely on human and animal power.

This conjecture was stated in 1637 by Pierre de Fermat, but it was proved only in 1994 by Andrew Wiles, who used tools including scheme theory from algebraic geometry, category theory, and homological algebra.

The U.S. healthcare system far outspends that of any other country, measured both in per capita spending and as a percentage of GDP, but attains worse healthcare outcomes when compared to peer countries for reasons that are debated.

Americans' diverse cultural roots are reflected in their clothing; however, sneakers, jeans, T-shirts, and baseball caps are emblematic of American styles.

Another method often employed in analytic philosophy is based on common sense.

Although these aspects of mathematical logic were introduced before the rise of computers, their use in compiler design, formal verification, program analysis, proof assistants and other aspects of computer science, contributed in turn to the expansion of these logical theories.

Despite disparate systems of confinement, four main institutions dominate: federal prisons, state prisons, local jails, and juvenile correctional facilities.

When a person has died, it is also said they have "passed away", "passed on", "expired", or "gone", among other socially accepted, religiously specific, slang, and irreverent terms.

In a language, the array of arbitrary signs connected to specific meanings is called the lexicon, and a single sign connected to a meaning is called a lexeme.

A societal shift in the roles of women was significantly responsible for the large increase in female paid labor participation starting in the 1970s, and by 1985 the majority of American women aged 16 and older were employed.

It reflects the personal experiences, interpretations, and memories of common people, showcasing how people subjectively remember the past.

Non-white men are especially unhealthy.

==== Spaceflight ====

The United States has maintained a space program since the late 1950s, beginning with the establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 1958.

Ziegler says worldwide, approximately 62 million people died from all causes and of those deaths, more than 36 million died of hunger or diseases due to deficiencies in micronutrients.

Reductions of these factors, caesarean sections when risks are present, and early detection of birth defects have lowered the rate of stillbirth.

In general, the comparative study of religion yields a deeper understanding of the fundamental philosophical concerns of religion such as ethics, metaphysics, and the nature and form of salvation.

Writing systems are not known to have existed among Native North Americans (north of Mesoamerica) before contact with Europeans.

Additionally, they are the "most supportive of freedom of the press and the right to use the Internet without government censorship".

The influence of philosophy is felt in several fields that require difficult practical decisions.

In addition to its total land area, the United States has one of the world's largest marine exclusive economic zones spanning approximately 4.5 million square miles (11.7 million km2) of ocean.

In 2023, the United States was ranked the second most technologically advanced country in the world (after South Korea) by Global Finance magazine.

Frazer; the psycho-analytic approach of Sigmund Freud; and further Émile Durkheim, Karl Marx, Max Weber, Mircea Eliade, E.E.

Handy and Jelly Roll Morton.

A closely related philosophical problem is how humans should treat other animals, for instance, whether it is acceptable to use non-human animals as food or for research experiments.

Similarly, many species of birds and whales learn their songs by imitating other members of their species.

For example, "the cat" is one phrase, and "on the mat" is another, because they would be treated as single units if a decision was made to emphasize the location by moving forward the prepositional phrase: "[And] on the mat, the cat sat".

And if our planet is so special, it becomes all the more important to preserve this unique world for ourselves, our descendants and the many creatures that call Earth home."

Some countries even define themselves in religious terms, such as The Islamic Republic of Iran.

The term algebra is derived from the Arabic word al-jabr meaning 'the reunion of broken parts' that he used for naming one of these methods in the title of his main treatise.

=== Language ===

While many languages are spoken in the United States, English is by far the most commonly spoken and written.

=== Theatre ===

Theatre is the branch of the performing arts concerned with acting out stories in front of an audience using combinations of speech, gesture, music, dance, sound, and spectacle.

Early money consisted of commodities; the oldest being in the form of cattle and the most widely used being cowrie shells.

Proper preparation for death and techniques and ceremonies for producing the ability to transfer one's spiritual attainments into another body (reincarnation) are subjects of detailed study in Tibet.

In the controversial book Fashionable Nonsense (1997), Sokal and Bricmont denounced the unfounded or abusive use of scientific terminology, particularly from mathematics or physics, in the social sciences.

New York, with its Fashion Week, is considered to be one of the "Big Four" global fashion capitals, along with Paris, Milan, and London.

==== Non-Western views ====

The sociologic emphasis placed on functionalism, conflict theory, and symbolic interactionism, has been criticized as Eurocentric.

Others argue that regardless of its definition, it is not appropriate to apply it to non-Western cultures.

=== The value of imaginative literature ===
Some researchers suggest that literary fiction can play a role in an individual's psychological development.

== Physiological and neural architecture of language and speech ==
Speaking is the default modality for language in all cultures.

Pastoral societies tend to create a food surplus, and have specialized labor and high levels of inequality.

Definitions of what constitutes dance are dependent on social, cultural, aesthetic, artistic, and moral constraints, ranging from functional movement (such as folk dance) to codified virtuoso techniques such as ballet.

This frequently happens when words or morphemes erode and the grammatical system is unconsciously rearranged to compensate for the lost element.

Farther west are the rocky Great Basin and the Chihuahuan, Sonoran, and Mojave deserts.

=== Politics ===


==== Impact ====

Religion has had a significant impact on the political system in many countries.

The lowest level in the federal judiciary is the federal district court, which decides all cases considered to be under "original jurisdiction", such as federal statutes, constitutional law, or international treaties.

Roman historiography was heavily influenced by Greek traditions.

The concept of religion was formed in the 16th and 17th centuries, despite the fact that ancient sacred texts like the Bible, the Quran, and others did not have a word or even a concept of religion in the original languages and neither did the people or the cultures in which these sacred texts were written.

These criteria do not assume the ability to anticipate death, understand its finality, or experience emotions equivalent to those of humans, but at the same time do not rule out the possibility of those abilities existing in some animals or that different kinds of emotional experiences might constitute grief.

These criteria were updated again, most recently in 2010, but substantial discrepancies remain across hospitals and medical specialties.

Despite this, modern technology is increasingly reliant on deep, domain-specific scientific knowledge.

If a sperm cell carrying a Y chromosome fertilizes the female ovum, the offspring will have a male karyotype (XY).

Algebraic topology, the use in topology of algebraic methods, mainly homological algebra.

Naturalism, regionalism, and realism were the major literary movements of the period.

About 11% use some form of public transportation.

These theories can be called continuity-based theories.

After Donald Trump was elected U.S. president in 2024, he sought to negotiate an end to the Russo-Ukrainian War.

=== Health ===

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), average American life expectancy at birth was 78.4 years in 2023 (75.8 years for men and 81.1 years for women).

Children learning a second language are more likely to achieve native-like fluency than adults, but in general, it is very rare for someone speaking a second language to pass completely for a native speaker.

Early African philosophy was primarily conducted and transmitted orally.

The U.S. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau through the Compact of Free Association.

Ancient historians describe how the invention of writing and the establishment of civilization happened in ancient Egypt in the 4th millennium BCE.

Since then, the interaction between mathematical innovations and scientific discoveries has led to a correlated increase in the development of both.

Like most other male mammals, a man's genome usually inherits an X chromosome from the mother and a Y chromosome from the father.

Performing arts are distinguished by this performance element in contrast with disciplines such as visual and literary arts, where the product is an object that does not require a performance to be observed and experienced.

In situations of extreme and sustained language contact, it may lead to the formation of new mixed languages that cannot be considered to belong to a single language family.

Further fields influenced by philosophy include psychology, sociology, linguistics, education, and the arts.

Environmental issues in the United States include debates on non-renewable resources and nuclear energy, air and water pollution, biodiversity, logging and deforestation, and climate change.

Warraich H (2017).

People with a lesion to this area develop expressive aphasia, meaning that they know what they want to say, they just cannot get it out.

Specific importance was given to the role of reason and sensory experience.

Nanotechnology will grant us the ability to manipulate matter "at the molecular and atomic scale", which could allow us to reshape ourselves and our environment in fundamental ways.

Al-Khwarizmi introduced systematic methods for transforming equations, such as moving a term from one side of an equation into the other side.

These results, called theorems, include previously proved theorems, axioms, and—in case of abstraction from nature—some basic properties that are considered true starting points of the theory under consideration.

An exemplary piece of narrative history of ancient China was the Zuo Zhuan, which was compiled no later than 389 BC, and attributed to the blind 5th-century BC historian Zuo Qiuming.

Because language emerged in the early prehistory of man, before the existence of any written records, its early development has left no historical traces, and it is believed that no comparable processes can be observed today.

Scientific explanations often follow technological developments rather than preceding them.

Starting in the east, the coastal plain of the Atlantic seaboard gives way to inland forests and rolling hills in the Piedmont plateau region.

== See also ==
Lists of U.S. state topics
Outline of the United States
List of online encyclopedias of U.S. states, typically maintained by state historical societies, universities, or humanities councils


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Sources ===

 This article incorporates text from a free content work.

It helps guide moral decisions by examining what moral obligations and rights people have.

In 2021, about 83% of Americans over age 12 listened to broadcast radio, while about 40% listened to podcasts.

A great many professional mathematicians take no interest in a definition of mathematics, or consider it undefinable.

For some extinct languages that are maintained for ritual or liturgical purposes, writing may be the primary mode, with speech secondary.

Religious practice may include rituals, sermons, commemoration or veneration (of deities or saints), sacrifices, festivals, feasts, trances, initiations, matrimonial and funerary services, meditation, prayer, music, art, dance, or public service.

Social roles are norms, duties, and patterns of behavior that relate to an individual's social status.

There are also smaller groups, including:

Restorationism, the belief that Christianity should be restored (as opposed to reformed) along the lines of what is known about the apostolic early church.

=== Conceptual art ===

Conceptual art is art where the concepts or ideas involved in the work take precedence over traditional aesthetic and material concerns.

Historically, some philosophers have suggested that the general direction of the course of history follows large patterns.

The sentence is analyzed as being constituted by a noun phrase, a verb, and a prepositional phrase; the prepositional phrase is further divided into a preposition and a noun phrase, and the noun phrases consist of an article and a noun.

In Western Europe, prior to the 18th century, literature denoted all books and writing.

=== Misdiagnosis ===

There are many anecdotal references to people being declared dead by physicians and then "coming back to life," sometimes days later in their coffin or when embalming procedures are about to begin.

=== Religion ===

The First Amendment guarantees the free exercise of religion in the country and forbids Congress from passing laws respecting its establishment.

Many cultures and religions have a concept of an afterlife.

Formants are the amplitude peaks in the frequency spectrum of a specific sound.

Artists who participate in these arts in front of an audience are called performers, including actors, magicians, comedians, dancers, musicians, and singers.

First came fire, which made edible a wider variety of foods, and made it less physically demanding to digest them.

Many of these innovations were used in the Enlightenment movement to challenge traditional authorities.

=== Subdivisions ===

In the U.S. federal system, sovereign powers are shared between three levels of government specified in the Constitution: the national government, the states, and Indian tribes.

It has spawned the dystopian and futuristic cyberpunk genre, which juxtaposes futuristic technology with societal collapse, dystopia or decay.

More recent technological inventions, including the printing press, telephone, and the Internet, have lowered barriers to communication and ushered in the knowledge economy.

Every religious act, not only in organized religion, but also in the most intimate movement of the soul, is culturally formed.

==== Electronic literature ====
Electronic literature is a literary genre consisting of works created exclusively on and for digital devices.

Nowadays it is a central literary text in English literature courses, throughout the world.

It was almost 2,000 years later that Johannes Kepler discovered that the trajectories of the planets are ellipses.

It can lead to a biased treatment of controversial topics in an attempt to present their national heritage in a favourable light.

One school of thought is that war evolved as a means to eliminate competitors, and that violence is an innate human characteristic.

The western Great Plains are semi-arid.

A number of prophetic experiences are consistent with psychotic symptoms, although retrospective diagnoses are practically impossible.

No consensus exists on the approximate time of adoption of either technology, but archaeologists have found archaeological evidence of clothing 90-120 kya and shelter 450 kya.

To attribute the efficacy of prayers or of sacramental signs to their mere external performance, apart from the interior dispositions that they demand is to fall into superstition.

In this way the semantic roles can map onto the grammatical relations in different ways, grouping an intransitive subject either with Agents (accusative type) or Patients (ergative type) or even making each of the three roles differently, which is called the tripartite type.

The eleventh and final ancient Roman aqueduct was built in 226 CE.

Pastoralists typically live a nomadic life, moving their herds from one pasture to another.

Chomsky considers these rules to be an innate feature of the human mind and to constitute the rudiments of what language is.

Later, Isaac Newton introduced infinitesimal calculus for explaining the movement of the planets with his law of gravitation.

=== Mental faculty, organ or instinct ===
One definition sees language primarily as the mental faculty that allows humans to undertake linguistic behaviour: to learn languages and to produce and understand utterances.

Operation and relations are generally represented by specific symbols or glyphs, such as + (plus), × (multiplication), 
  
    
      
        ∫
      
    
    {\textstyle \int }
  
 (integral), = (equal), and < (less than).

== History ==


=== Indigenous peoples ===

The first inhabitants of North America migrated from Siberia over 12,000 years ago, either across the Bering land bridge or along the now-submerged Ice Age coastline.

However, languages differ from biological organisms in that they readily incorporate elements from other languages through the process of diffusion, as speakers of different languages come into contact.

It is the country's second-largest private employer and the third-largest employer overall.

The invention of the wheel in the Bronze Age allowed greater travel and the creation of more complex machines.

Continuing improvements led to the furnace and bellows and provided, for the first time, the ability to smelt and forge gold, copper, silver, and lead – native metals found in relatively pure form in nature.

Symbolic interactionists study humans' use of shared language to create common symbols and meanings, and use this frame of reference to understand how individuals interact to create symbolic worlds, and in turn, how these worlds shape individual behaviors.

As land is the major source of wealth, social hierarchy develops based on landownership and not labor.

Amid rising nationalism, African states gradually gained independence in the aftermath of World War II, a period that saw economic progress, rapid population growth, and struggles for political stability.

== Education ==

Men traditionally received more education than women as a result of single-sex education.

For example, in the Australian language Dyirbal, a married man must use a special set of words to refer to everyday items when speaking in the presence of his mother-in-law.

It resulted in the Trail of Tears (1830–1850), in which an estimated 60,000 Native Americans living east of the Mississippi River were forcibly removed and displaced to lands far to the west, causing 13,200 to 16,700 deaths along the forced march.

A volcano, a break in the earth's crust that allows lava, ash, and gases to escape, has three states that it may be in, active, dormant, and extinct.

Concerns about technology replacing human labor however are long-lasting.

The term myth can be used pejoratively by both religious and non-religious people.

As a result, the Americas were integrated into the global network, triggering a vast biological exchange of plants, animals, people, and diseases.

In the 19th century, mathematicians discovered non-Euclidean geometries, which do not follow the parallel postulate.

By fostering a basic historical awareness, it seeks to instil a sense of identity by helping them understand their cultural roots.

Although security measures are placed, some criminals are able to bypass them.

Their holy books are Pravachanasara and Samayasara written by their Prophets Kundakunda and Amritchandra as their original canon is lost.

==== Jainism ====
Jainism, taught primarily by Rishabhanatha (the founder of ahimsa) is an ancient Indian religion that prescribes a path of non-violence, truth and anekantavada for all forms of living beings in this universe; which helps them to eliminate all the Karmas, and hence to attain freedom from the cycle of birth and death (saṃsāra), that is, achieving nirvana.

Convex geometry, the study of convex sets, which takes its importance from its applications in optimization.

Chinese historians established a coherent and systematic method for recording historical events earlier than other traditions.

They used a lead sulfide flux in the smelting of ores, along with the use of a wind-drafted clay kiln, which released lead into the atmosphere and the sediment of rivers.

The Greek and Arabic mathematical texts were in turn translated to Latin during the Middle Ages and made available in Europe.

In the late 20th century, some qualities traditionally associated with marriage (such as the "triple Ps" of protecting, providing, and procreating) were still considered signs of having achieved manhood.

This definition stresses the universality of language to all humans, and it emphasizes the biological basis for the human capacity for language as a unique development of the human brain.

For instance, in languages of east Asia such as Thai, Burmese, and Javanese, different words are used according to whether a speaker is addressing someone of higher or lower rank than oneself in a ranking system with animals and children ranking the lowest and gods and members of royalty as the highest.

Edward Burnett Tylor defined religion in 1871 as "the belief in spiritual beings".

The U.S. men's national soccer team has qualified for eleven World Cups, while the women's national team has won the FIFA Women's World Cup and Olympic soccer tournament four times each.

This is because pastoral groups tend to live in open areas where movement is easy, which enables political integration.

An early approach found in ancient Greek and Roman philosophy is that philosophy is the spiritual practice of developing one's rational capacities.

The traditions of close study of religious texts has furthered the development of techniques and theories in literary studies.

It was accompanied by other intellectual developments, such as humanism and the Enlightenment, which ushered in secularization.

A portion of the world's population are members of new religious movements.

Representing the same transformation Jesus Christ embodied after his body was placed in the tomb for three days, each person's body will be resurrected, reuniting the spirit and body in a perfect form.

=== Sculpture ===

Sculpture is the branch of the visual arts that operates in three dimensions.

The concept of "ancient religion" stems from modern interpretations of a range of practices that conform to a modern concept of religion, influenced by early modern and 19th century Christian discourse.

Diophantus (3rd century) and al-Khwarizmi (9th century) were the two main precursors of algebra.

Atheistic content is also found to be common with temporal lobe epilepsy.

According to the Ethnologue, 389 languages (nearly 6%) have more than a million speakers.

Women live longer than men in all countries, and across all age groups, for which reliable records exist.

This expected technological unemployment has led to calls for increased emphasis on computer science education and debates about universal basic income.

Although there are many historical prototypes, so-called "novels before the novel", the modern novel form emerges late in cultural history—roughly during the eighteenth century.

=== Geometry ===

Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics.

The same process applied to all stop consonants and explains why Italic languages such as Latin have p in words like pater and pisces, whereas Germanic languages, like English, have father and fish.

Its aftermath left the U.S. and the Soviet Union as rival superpowers, competing for ideological dominance and international influence during the Cold War.

The Rocky Mountains, west of the Great Plains, extend north to south across the country, peaking at over 14,000 feet (4,300 m) in Colorado.

=== Energy ===

In 2023, the United States received approximately 84% of its energy from fossil fuel, and its largest source of energy was petroleum (38%), followed by natural gas (36%), renewable sources (9%), coal (9%), and nuclear power (9%).

Despite some student loan forgiveness programs in place, student loan debt increased by 102% between 2010 and 2020, and exceeded $1.7 trillion in 2022.

Internal criticism evaluates the content of a source, typically beginning with the clarification of the meaning within the source.

Its classical period lasted until the 12th century CE and was strongly influenced by ancient Greek philosophers.

Many languages use morphology to cross-reference words within a sentence.

Each state is allocated two electors plus one additional elector for every congressional district in the state, which in effect combines to equal the number of elected officials that state sends to Congress.

The rhythmic and lyrical styles of African-American music in particular have influenced American music.

Explanations of social phenomena had therefore to be constructed within this level, individuals being merely transient occupants of comparatively stable social roles.

Together with colonization, it led to the collapse of major empires as demographic and cultural landscapes were reshaped.

By the early 20th century, factory electrification, the introduction of the assembly line, and other labor-saving techniques created the system of mass production.

Larger food supplies due to improved technology mean agrarian communities are larger than horticultural communities.

Due to climate change in the country, extreme weather has become more frequent in the U.S. in the 21st century, with three times the number of reported heat waves compared to the 1960s.

In sociology, however, the term myth has a non-pejorative meaning.

It also includes the discussion of worldviews that reject religious doctrines.

Within video game culture, debates surround whether video games should be classified as an art form and whether video game developers—AAA or indie—should be classified as artists.

The Fall of Communism and the dissolution of the Soviet Union from 1989 to 1991 marked the end of the Cold War and left the United States as the world's sole superpower.

It is the world's largest religion, with about 2.3 billion followers as of 2015.

The Catechism of the Catholic Church states that superstition "in some sense represents a perverse excess of religion" (para.

The initialism "USA", a noun, is also common.

The past itself, by contrast, is static and unchangeable.

==== Information ====

An information society is a society where the usage, creation, distribution, manipulation and integration of information is a significant activity.

The country's rail transport network, the longest in the world at 182,412.3 mi (293,564.2 km), handles mostly freight (in contrast to more passenger-centered rail in Europe).

Some laws, such as U.S. naturalization requirements, nonetheless standardize English.

Several attempts to develop comprehensive systems of philosophy were made in the 19th century, for instance, by German idealism and Marxism.

== Types ==


=== Poetry ===

Poetry has traditionally been distinguished from prose by its greater use of the aesthetic qualities of language, including musical devices such as assonance, alliteration, rhyme, and rhythm, and by being set in lines and verses rather than paragraphs, and more recently its use of other typographical elements.

In Western culture, for example, greater masculinity usually brings greater social status.

Additionally, children could contribute labor to the raising of crops more readily than they could participate in hunter-gatherer activities.

In the philosophy of language, the view of pragmatics as being central to language and meaning is often associated with Wittgenstein's later works and with ordinary language philosophers such as J. L. Austin, Paul Grice, John Searle, and W.O.

Being aware of the inadequacies of a source helps historians decide whether and which aspects of it to trust, and how to use it to construct a narrative.

They explore how in the first millennium BCE the Ancient Greeks contributed key elements to the culture, philosophy, and politics associated with the Western world, and how their cultural heritage influenced the Roman and Byzantine Empires.

Other definitions for death focus on the character of cessation of organismic functioning and human death, which refers to irreversible loss of personhood.

Fire also enabled smelting, and the use of tin, copper, and iron tools, used for hunting or tradesmanship.

Studies have found that computers did not create significant net technological unemployment.

Both expressive and receptive aphasia also affect the use of sign language, in analogous ways to how they affect speech, with expressive aphasia causing signers to sign slowly and with incorrect grammar, whereas a signer with receptive aphasia will sign fluently, but make little sense to others and have difficulties comprehending others' signs.

For instance, historicism about truth states that truth depends on historical circumstances, meaning that there are no transhistorical truths.

Each discipline in the performing arts is temporal in nature, meaning the product is performed over a period of time.

As it pertains to human life, death is an irreversible process where someone loses their existence as a person.

They can be discrete and self-contained or combine and interweave with other art forms, such as combining artwork with the written word in comics.

Industrial societies also have an increased environmental impact.

Extension of lifespan can be achieved by good diet, exercise, and avoidance of hazards such as smoking.

Influential contributions shaping this tradition were made by the historians Eusebius of Caesarea and Bede and by the theologian Augustine of Hippo.

The Romans called such fear of the gods superstitio.

The U.S. president is the head of state, commander-in-chief of the military, chief executive of the federal government, and has the ability to veto legislative bills from the U.S. Congress before they become law.

Critical examinations of languages, such as philosophy of language, the relationships between language and thought, how words represent experience, etc., have been debated at least since Gorgias and Plato in ancient Greek civilization.

There are also many unclassified languages whose relationships have not been established, and spurious languages may have not existed at all.

It provides an interdisciplinary perspective and studies the scope and fundamental concepts of these fields.

The arrival of the Europeans in the 16th century prompted significant transformations, and by the end of the 19th century, most of the region had come under Western control.

Historical writing was transformed in the 19th century as it became more professional and science-oriented.

Pragmatists stress the significance of concrete practical consequences for assessing whether a philosophical theory is true.

Manifold theory, the study of shapes that are not necessarily embedded in a larger space.

Throughout its long history, Japan had no concept of religion since there was no corresponding Japanese word, nor anything close to its meaning, but when American warships appeared off the coast of Japan in 1853 and forced the Japanese government to sign treaties demanding, among other things, freedom of religion, the country had to contend with this idea.

Starting in the 19th century, continental Europeans started using the terms Technik (German) or technique (French) to refer to a 'way of doing', which included all technical arts, such as dancing, navigation, or printing, whether or not they required tools or instruments.

uses mathematical knowledge.

Of all causes, roughly 150,000 people die around the world each day.

The remains of a former organism normally begin to decompose shortly after death.

Early in the 20th century, Ferdinand de Saussure introduced the idea of language as a static system of interconnected units, defined through the oppositions between them.

The American prison system is largely heterogenous, with thousands of relatively independent systems operating across federal, state, local, and tribal levels.

This aspect of mathematical activity is emphasized in recreational mathematics.

Matthew 23:16–22" (para.

Art critics usually criticize art in the context of aesthetics or the theory of beauty.

Some of the questions addressed by epistemologists include "By what method(s) can one acquire knowledge?

Influential schools of thought in political philosophy are liberalism, conservativism, socialism, and anarchism.

In 2019 philosopher Nick Bostrom introduced the notion of a vulnerable world, "one in which there is some level of technological development at which civilization almost certainly gets devastated by default", citing the risks of a pandemic caused by bioterrorists, or an arms race triggered by the development of novel armaments and the loss of mutual assured destruction.

Some modern painters, such as Jean Dubuffet or Anselm Kiefer, incorporate different materials, such as sand, cement, straw, wood, or strands of hair, for their artwork texture.

Human social structures are complex and highly cooperative, featuring the specialization of labor via social roles.

These patients maintained the ability to sustain circulation and respiration, control temperature, excrete wastes, heal wounds, fight infections and, most dramatically, to gestate fetuses (in the case of pregnant "brain-dead" women)."

Americans tend to greatly value socioeconomic achievement, but being ordinary or average is promoted by some as a noble condition as well.

Political philosophy involves a general inquiry into normative matters and differs in this respect from political science, which aims to provide empirical descriptions of actually existing states.

The electric guitar, first invented in the 1930s, and mass-produced by the 1940s, had an enormous influence on popular music, in particular due to the development of rock and roll.

Writer and critic John Neal in the early- to mid-19th century helped advance America toward a unique literature and culture by criticizing predecessors such as Washington Irving for imitating their British counterparts, and by influencing writers such as Edgar Allan Poe, who took American poetry and short fiction in new directions.

In education, mathematics is a core part of the curriculum and forms an important element of the STEM academic disciplines.

In 2024, the U.S. ranked 35th among 180 countries in the Environmental Performance Index.

Postcolonialism aimed to undermine the hegemony of the Western approach and postmodernism rejected the claim to a single universal truth in history.

==== America ====


=== Women and literature ===

The widespread education of women was not common until the nineteenth century, and because of this, literature until recently was mostly male dominated.

The U.S. has produced the most Nobel Prize winners of any country, with 411 (having won 413 awards).

Aesthetic, pragmatic, expressive, formalist, relativist, processional, imitation, ritual, cognition, mimetic, and postmodern theories are some of the many theories to criticize and appreciate art.

In 2011, the National Endowment for the Arts included video games in its definition of a "work of art", and the Smithsonian American Art Museum presented an exhibit titled The Art of the Video Game in 2012.

Mathematical modeling allows economists to create structured frameworks to test hypotheses and analyze complex interactions.

Outside of Christianity, scholars have looked at law and religion links in the Muslim Middle East and pagan Rome.

Although it is often treated together with the philosophy of art, aesthetics is a broader category that encompasses other aspects of experience, such as natural beauty.

Since the 1960s, the assumption that government funding of basic research would lead to the discovery of marketable technologies has lost credibility.

In March 2024, researchers reported that the beginnings of human language began about 1.6 million years ago.

=== Others ===
Some branches of history are characterized by the methods they employ, such as quantitative history and digital history, which rely on quantitative methods and digital media.

Before the advent of modern archaeology in the 19th century, antiquarianism laid the groundwork for this discipline and played a vital role in preserving historical artefacts.

This means that the definitions must be absolutely unambiguous and the proofs must be reducible to a succession of applications of inference rules, without any use of empirical evidence and intuition.

"The States" is an established colloquial shortening of the name, used particularly from abroad; "stateside" is the corresponding adjective or adverb.

== Types ==
Sociologists tend to classify societies based on their level of technology, and place societies in three broad categories: pre-industrial, industrial, and postindustrial.

The development of religion has taken different forms in different cultures.

Some languages have only a few phonemes, for example, Rotokas and Pirahã language with 11 and 10 phonemes respectively, whereas languages like Taa may have as many as 141 phonemes.

Jazz grew from blues and ragtime in the early 20th century, developing from the innovations and recordings of composers such as W.C.

Southern African traditions include Akamba mythology, Masai mythology, Malagasy mythology, San religion, Lozi mythology, Tumbuka mythology, and Zulu mythology.

While the invention of vacuum tubes allowed for digital computing with computers like the ENIAC, their sheer size precluded widespread use until innovations in quantum physics allowed for the invention of the transistor in 1947, which significantly compacted computers and led the digital transition.

For men, primary sex characteristics include the penis and testicles.

Public transportation in the United States is well developed in the largest urban areas, notably New York City, Washington, D.C., Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and San Francisco; otherwise, coverage is generally less extensive than in most other developed countries.

Inaccurate predictions, rather than being caused by invalid mathematical concepts, imply the need to change the mathematical model used.

While most men are heterosexual, significant minorities are homosexual or bisexual.

After death, the individual will undergo a separation from mortality to immortality; their soul leaves the body, entering a realm of spirits.

The country's 3.7 million Native Americans account for about 1%, and some 574 native tribes are recognized by the federal government.

Miscarriage is one of the most frequent problems in pregnancy, and is reported in around 12–15% of all clinical pregnancies; however, by including pregnancy losses during menstruation, it could be up to 17–22% of all pregnancies.

What is called ancient religion today, they would have only called law.

It also encouraged open defiance of the military draft (leading to the end of conscription in 1973) and wide opposition to U.S. intervention in Vietnam, with the U.S. totally withdrawing in 1975.

At this time, it meant 'story, tale', encompassing both factual and fictional narratives.

That is, the basic structure of theism is essentially a distinction between a transcendent deity and all else, between the creator and his creation, between God and man.

=== Westward expansion and Civil War (1800–1865) ===

In the late 18th century, American settlers began to expand westward in larger numbers, many with a sense of manifest destiny.

Sermons by John-Baptist Massillon.

In abbreviation: religion is the substance of culture, culture is the form of religion.

However, there are exceptions, such as Hydra and the jellyfish Turritopsis dohrnii, which research shows to be biologically immortal.

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) operates with five levels of language endangerment: "safe", "vulnerable" (not spoken by children outside the home), "definitely endangered" (not spoken by children), "severely endangered" (only spoken by the oldest generations), and "critically endangered" (spoken by a few members of the oldest generation, often semi-speakers).

For example, political philosophy, ethics, and aesthetics are sometimes linked under the general heading of value theory as they investigate normative or evaluative aspects.

Furthermore, anthropologist Barbara J.

Numerous technical terms used in mathematics are neologisms, such as polynomial and homeomorphism.

This would become the United States' most prestigious culinary school, where many of the most talented American chefs would study prior to successful careers.

In Christianity, death is the result of the fall of man after eating the fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.

The United States has an extensive air transportation network.

Due to their prominence, men are more likely to be both the objects and instigators of humorous or disparaging content.

Müller characterized many other cultures around the world, including Egypt, Persia, and India, as having a similar power structure at this point in history.

Since the 1850s, the Democratic and Republican parties have dominated American politics, while American values are based on a democratic tradition inspired by the American Enlightenment movement.

Many countries around the world adopted this aspect of the 1789 Constitution of the United States, especially in the postcolonial Americas.

The method of demonstrating rigorous proof was enhanced in the sixteenth century through the use of symbolic notation.

== Methods ==

Methods of philosophy are ways of conducting philosophical inquiry.

The Nobel Prize in Literature was one of the six Nobel Prizes established by the will of Alfred Nobel in 1895, and is awarded to an author on the basis of their body of work, rather than to, or for, a particular work itself.

The United States has the world's largest music market, with a total retail value of $15.9 billion in 2022.

The main branches of ethics are meta-ethics, normative ethics, and applied ethics.

"3 classifier-for-long-objects of tree" – three trees


==== Morphology ====
In linguistics, the study of the internal structure of complex words and the processes by which words are formed is called morphology.

Some survivors of such experiences report it as "seeing the afterlife while they were dying".

Number theory was once called arithmetic, but nowadays this term is mostly used for numerical calculations.

In the 19th century, the internal development of geometry (pure mathematics) led to definition and study of non-Euclidean geometries, spaces of dimension higher than three and manifolds.

(Q50:16) Life on earth is the one and only chance for people to prepare themselves for the life to come and choose to either believe or not believe in God, and death is the end of that learning opportunity.

History further examines the meaning of historical events and the underlying human motives driving them.

At the same time, history education can foster a sense of cultural identity by connecting students with their heritage, traditions, and practices, for example, by introducing them to iconic elements ranging from national landmarks and monuments to historical figures and traditional festivities.

Twelve American laureates have won the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Initially, death was defined as occurring when breathing and the heartbeat ceased, a status still known as clinical death.

Puerto Rico and Guam have remained U.S.

Tertiary modes – such as semaphore, Morse code and spelling alphabets – convey the secondary mode of writing in a different medium.

Subsequent innovations included more uniform, predictable legal systems, sacred texts, and the origins of modern practices of scientific inquiry and knowledge-consolidation, all largely reliant on portable and easily reproducible forms of writing.

2021
Wald, George.

Some scientific literature is claimed to support the feasibility of cryonics.

This involves disambiguating individual terms that could be misunderstood but may also require a general translation if the source is written in an unfamiliar language.

Nomadic life has high social cohesion (asabijja), which Khaldun argued arose from kinship, shared customs, and a shared need for defense.

History is a broad discipline encompassing many branches.

The four major broadcasters in the U.S. are the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), American Broadcasting Company (ABC), and Fox Broadcasting Company (FOX).

Whether a document is a primary or a secondary source depends not only on the document itself but also on the purpose for which it is used.

The United States also asserts sovereignty over five major island territories and various uninhabited islands in Oceania and the Caribbean.

Discrete mathematics includes:

Combinatorics, the art of enumerating mathematical objects that satisfy some given constraints.

Anthropologists investigate human culture and behaviour, such as social structures, belief systems, and ritual practices.

Men tend to be taller and heavier than women, and adjusted for height, men tend to have greater lean and bone mass than women, and lower fat mass.

Fast (rotary) potters' wheels enabled early mass production of pottery, but it was the use of the wheel as a transformer of energy (through water wheels, windmills, and even treadmills) that revolutionized the application of nonhuman power sources.

Spanish colonization established Spanish Florida in 1513, the first European colony in what is now the continental United States.

Humans acquire language through social interaction in early childhood, and children generally speak fluently by approximately three years old.

For getting an algorithm that can be implemented and can solve systems of polynomial equations and inequalities, George Collins introduced the cylindrical algebraic decomposition that became a fundamental tool in real algebraic geometry.

Archaeological evidence shows that instruction in mathematics occurred as early as the second millennium BCE in ancient Babylonia.

Architectural works may be seen as cultural and political symbols or works of art.

A necropsy, which is not always a medical procedure, was a term previously used to describe an unregulated postmortem examination.

The "nature" of the objects defined this way is a philosophical problem that mathematicians leave to philosophers, even if many mathematicians have opinions on this nature, and use their opinion—sometimes called "intuition"—to guide their study and proofs.

Translated by Sanches J.

The Old English form primarily meant "person" or "human being" and referred to men, women, and children alike.

The Ethnologue establishes linguistic groups based on studies of mutual intelligibility, and therefore often includes more categories than more conservative classifications.

According to this view, actions should conform to what an ideally virtuous agent would do by manifesting virtues like generosity and honesty.

Committee membership is by tradition and statute bipartisan, but all committees are chaired by a member of the majority party, who sets the committee agenda.

In mathematics, the experimentation may consist of computation on selected examples or of the study of figures or other representations of mathematical objects (often mind representations without physical support).

Futures research methodologies include survey research, modeling, statistical analysis, and computer simulations.

The use of human language relies on social convention and is acquired through learning.

Spain ceded Florida and its Gulf Coast territory in 1819.

Products are broadly categorized as being either repeatable (for example, by script or score) or improvised for each performance.

The state police departments have authority in their respective state, and federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the U.S.

Literary works are all works of literature; that is all works expressed in print or writing (other than dramatic or musical works).

History is the systematic study of the past, focusing primarily on the human past.

=== By period ===
Chronological division is a common approach to organizing the vast expanse of history into more manageable segments.

This view, which can be traced back to the philosophers Kant and Descartes, understands language to be largely innate, for example, in Chomsky's theory of universal grammar, or American philosopher Jerry Fodor's extreme innatist theory.

In modern academia, the arts can be grouped with, or a subset of, the humanities.

Neo-Confucianism developed in the 11th century CE.

It is the world's oldest surviving federation, and its presidential system of national government has been adopted, in whole or in part, by many newly independent states worldwide following their decolonization.

"On Death" .

The rise of secularism resulted in material mementos of death declining.

Published in the 5th century BCE, the Histories by Herodotus was one of the foundational texts of the Western historical tradition, putting more emphasis on rational and evidence-based inquiry than the stories of Homer and other poets.

== Law ==


=== Law and literature ===
The law and literature movement focuses on the interdisciplinary connection between law and literature.

From 2024, the U.S. plans to triple its nuclear power capacity by 2050.

=== Government and politics ===

Governments create laws and policies that affect the people that they govern.

This cultural evolution has a profound effect on patterns of community.

About 41.2 million spoke Spanish at home, making it the second most commonly used language.

An analysis of data from the 1998 US General Social Survey, whilst broadly confirming that religious activity was associated with better health and well-being, also suggested that the role of different dimensions of spirituality/religiosity in health is rather more complicated.

One such disease is tuberculosis, a bacterial disease that killed 1.8 million people in 2015.

==== Grammatical categories ====

Grammar can be described as a system of categories and a set of rules that determine how categories combine to form different aspects of meaning.

A recognized method of extending maximum lifespan is calorie restriction.

Many leading developed world causes of death can be postponed by diet and physical activity, but the accelerating incidence of disease with age still imposes limits on human longevity.

Among them are Basque, spoken in Europe, Zuni of New Mexico, Purépecha of Mexico, Ainu of Japan, Burushaski of Pakistan, and many others.

However, baseball has been regarded as the U.S. "national sport" since the late 19th century.

These types of acts are called speech acts, although they can also be carried out through writing or hand signing.

", or ideophones like "splash" that mimic the sound of some event.

As another example with more complexity, in the Yupik word tuntussuqatarniksatengqiggtuq, which means "He had not yet said again that he was going to hunt reindeer", the word consists of the morphemes tuntu-ssur-qatar-ni-ksaite-ngqiggte-uq with the meanings, "reindeer-hunt-future-say-negation-again-third.person.singular.indicative", and except for the morpheme tuntu ("reindeer") none of the other morphemes can appear in isolation.

Stephen Anderson states that the age of spoken languages is estimated at 60,000 to 100,000 years and that: Researchers on the evolutionary origin of language generally find it plausible to suggest that language was invented only once, and that all modern spoken languages are thus in some way related, even if that relation can no longer be recovered ... because of limitations on the methods available for reconstruction.

=== Tool for communication ===

Yet another definition sees language as a system of communication that enables humans to exchange verbal or symbolic utterances.

Because norms for language use are shared by members of a specific group, communicative style also becomes a way of displaying and constructing group identity.

If eventually no one speaks the language at all, it becomes an extinct language.

The Mayflower Compact in Massachusetts and the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut established precedents for local representative self-governance and constitutionalism that would develop throughout the American colonies.

=== Existential risk ===

Existential risk researchers analyze risks that could lead to human extinction or civilizational collapse, and look for ways to build resilience against them.

This distinction is complicated by various hybrid forms such as digital poetry, sound poetry, concrete poetry and prose poem, and more generally by the fact that prose possesses rhythm.

The social constructionists argue that religion is a modern concept that developed from Christianity and was then applied inappropriately to non-Western cultures.

While some ceramic products are considered fine art, others are considered decorative, industrial, or applied art objects.

In the 2010s and early 2020s, the United States has experienced increased political polarization and democratic backsliding.

Epicureanism is a Hellenistic philosophy that is considered by many of its practitioners as a type of (sometimes non-theistic) religious identity.

Men's fashion also encompasses more casual garments such as t-shirts, sweatshirts, jeans, shorts, and swimwear, which are typically intended for informal settings.

As well as segments such as consonants and vowels, some languages also use sound in other ways to convey meaning.

Many aspects of language use can be seen to be adapted specifically to these purposes.

Influential topics in the post-colonial period were positivism, the philosophy of liberation, and the exploration of identity and culture.

Literature in Latin would flourish for the next six centuries, and includes essays, histories, poems, plays, and other writings.

British colonization followed with the 1607 settlement of Virginia, the first of the Thirteen Colonies.

They are typically able to understand what is being said to them, but unable to speak fluently.

Wealth in the United States is highly concentrated; in 2011, the richest 10% of the adult population owned 72% of the country's household wealth, while the bottom 50% owned just 2%.

Men weigh more than women.

Statistical hypothesis testing, is run on data from clinical trials to determine whether a new treatment works.

2009.

Of the roughly 150,000 people who die each day across the globe, about two thirds die of age-related causes.

World history is another branch with a wide topic.

Eventually, printing enabled other forms of publishing besides books.

In February 2024, the total U.S. federal government debt was $34.4 trillion.

The scientific study of language is called linguistics.

According to the MacMillan Encyclopedia of Religions, there is an experiential aspect to religion which can be found in almost every culture:

... almost every known culture [has] a depth dimension in cultural experiences ... toward some sort of ultimacy and transcendence that will provide norms and power for the rest of life.

== Structure ==
When described as a system of symbolic communication, language is traditionally seen as consisting of three parts: signs, meanings, and a code connecting signs with their meanings.

There are two forms of abortion: a medical abortion and an in-clinic abortion or sometimes referred to as a surgical abortion.

Such determination, therefore, requires drawing precise conceptual boundaries between life and death.

For example, descriptive linguistics examines the grammar of single languages, theoretical linguistics develops theories on how best to conceptualize and define the nature of language based on data from the various extant human languages, sociolinguistics studies how languages are used for social purposes informing in turn the study of the social functions of language and grammatical description, neurolinguistics studies how language is processed in the human brain and allows the experimental testing of theories, computational linguistics builds on theoretical and descriptive linguistics to construct computational models of language often aimed at processing natural language or at testing linguistic hypotheses, and historical linguistics relies on grammatical and lexical descriptions of languages to trace their individual histories and reconstruct trees of language families by using the comparative method.

The three-branch system is known as the presidential system, in contrast to the parliamentary system where the executive is part of the legislative body.

If a mathematical statement has yet to be proven (or disproven), it is termed a conjecture.

The Annales school used insights from sociology, psychology, and economics to study long-term developments.

General metaphysics investigates being as such.

Subsequent grammatical traditions developed in all of the ancient cultures that adopted writing.

The most common division in the field of criticism is between historical criticism and evaluation, a form of art history, and contemporary criticism of work by living artists.

For example, "every free module is flat" and "a field is always a ring".

One of its central concerns was how philosophical and scientific knowledge are created.

Many English words such as virtue and virile (from the Indo-European root vir meaning man) reflect this.

=== Modern Western ===
The concept of religion originated in the modern era in the West.

Some speech sounds, both vowels and consonants, involve release of air flow through the nasal cavity, and these are called nasals or nasalized sounds.

Sociologist and political economist Max Weber has argued that Protestant Christian countries are wealthier because of their Protestant work ethic.

An example is the set of all integers.

Aging is seen as inevitable, so according to Aubrey de Grey little is spent on research into anti-aging therapies, a phenomenon known as pro-aging trance.

=== Unreasonable effectiveness ===
The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics is a phenomenon that was named and first made explicit by physicist Eugene Wigner.

with the -like suffix, as in "noun-like").

== Government and politics ==

The United States is a federal republic of 50 states and a federal capital district, Washington, D.C.

Debates about the nature and origin of language go back to the ancient world.

It is a rational and critical inquiry that reflects on its methods and assumptions.

=== Algebra ===

  
Algebra is the art of manipulating equations and formulas.

This way, historiography traces the development of history as an academic discipline, highlighting how the dominant methods, themes, and research goals have changed over time.

The philosophy following them was shaped by Socrates (469–399 BCE), Plato (427–347 BCE), and Aristotle (384–322 BCE).

In many polysynthetic languages, verbs cross-reference their subjects and objects.

There are 63 national parks, and hundreds of other federally managed monuments, forests, and wilderness areas, administered by the National Park Service and other agencies.

These views sometimes contested traditional European perspectives.

Examples include the resurrection of their real-life founder Jesus, which, to Christians, explains the means by which they are freed from sin, is symbolic of the power of life over death, and is also said to be a historical event.

Sunni Islam is the largest denomination within Islam and follows the Qur'an, the ahadith (plural of Hadith) which record the sunnah, whilst placing emphasis on the sahabah.

The country has the world's largest Christian population, which includes the fourth-largest population of Catholics.

Cysouw, Michael; Good, Jeff (2013).

These documents contain prosaic records largely concerned with trade (lists, inventories, receipts, etc.

It is distinct from the definition of the biological male sex, as both males and females can exhibit masculine traits.

The anthropologist Clifford Geertz defined religion as a:

... system of symbols which acts to establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting moods and motivations in men by formulating conceptions of a general order of existence and clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality that the moods and motivations seem uniquely realistic.

Diplomatic history examines international relations between states.

Paleo-Indians first migrated from North Asia to North America over 12,000 years ago, and formed various civilizations.

This includes the examination of specific events, like the analysis of a particular battle and the discussion of the different causes of a war.

Talking about death and witnessing it is a difficult issue in most cultures.

Mathematics is essential in the natural sciences, engineering, medicine, finance, computer science, and the social sciences.

A second historical example is the theory of ellipses.

The September 11 attacks on the United States in 2001 by the pan-Islamist militant organization al-Qaeda led to the war on terror and subsequent military interventions in Afghanistan and in Iraq.

Charismatic individuals have emerged at many times and places in the world.

Algebra became an area in its own right only with François Viète (1540–1603), who introduced the use of variables for representing unknown or unspecified numbers.

Military history studies the impact and development of armed conflicts in human history.

Authoritarian regimes, like Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union, and China, manipulated historical narratives for ideological purposes.

Methods for producing interchangeable parts and the establishment of a machine tool industry enabled the large-scale manufacturing of U.S. consumer products in the late 19th century.

=== Culture ===

Languages, understood as the particular set of speech norms of a particular community, are also a part of the larger culture of the community that speaks them.

It is the only advanced economy that does not guarantee its workers paid vacation nationally and one of a few countries in the world without federal paid family leave as a legal right.

Archaeological evidence of hearths was dated to 790 kya; researchers believe this is likely to have intensified human socialization and may have contributed to the emergence of language.

The United States is a member of the G7, G20, and OECD intergovernmental organizations.

In the following Cold War era, the continent was divided into a Western and an Eastern bloc.

Contemporary literature is more pluralistic than in previous eras, with the closest thing to a unifying feature being a trend toward self-conscious experiments with language.

The country has been described as having the values of individualism and personal autonomy, as well as a strong work ethic and competitiveness.

In Asia, the role of religion differs widely between countries.

== Definitions ==

Definitions of literature have varied over time.

The history of newspaper publishing began in Germany in 1609, with the publishing of magazines following in 1663.

It was banned in the United States from 1921 until 1933 on the grounds of obscenity.

There is still a philosophical debate whether mathematics is a science.

The U.S. emerged relatively unscathed from the war, with even greater economic power and international political influence.

In both cases, these particles were discovered a few years later by specific experiments.

The goal is to give an unbiased description of the appearance of things.

Natural languages are spoken, signed, or both; however, any language can be encoded into secondary media using auditory, visual, or tactile stimuli – for example, writing, whistling, signing, or braille.

), Jeff Hearn (ed.

However, in other jurisdictions, some follow the brainstem version of brain death.

Economic historians typically focus on general trends in the form of impersonal forces, such as inflation, rather than the actions and decisions of individuals.

=== Prose ===

As noted above, prose generally makes far less use of the aesthetic qualities of language than poetry.

With this increase in population and availability of labor came an increase in labor specialization.

In 2025, "these systems hold nearly 2 million people in 1,566 state prisons, 98 federal prisons, 3,116 local jails, 1,277 juvenile correctional facilities, 133 immigration detention facilities, and 80 Indian country jails, as well as in military prisons, civil commitment centers, state psychiatric hospitals, and prisons in the U.S.

The U.S. military is widely regarded as the most powerful and advanced in the world.

In 1922, Nikolai Kondratiev discerned the ~50-year-long Kondratiev cycle, which explains phases of economic growth or crisis.

John Murphy & Co.
Liguori, Alphonsus (1868).

The theologian Antoine Vergote took the term supernatural simply to mean whatever transcends the powers of nature or human agency.

The concept of religion was first used in the 1500s to distinguish the domain of the church and the domain of civil authorities; the Peace of Augsburg marks such an instance, which has been described by Christian Reus-Smit as "the first step on the road toward a European system of sovereign states."

The ancient Romans had many public flush toilets, which emptied into an extensive sewage system.

== Training and practice ==


=== Education ===

Mathematics has a remarkable ability to cross cultural boundaries and time periods.

=== Neolithic ===

The Neolithic Revolution (or First Agricultural Revolution) brought about an acceleration of technological innovation, and a consequent increase in social complexity.

There have been many forms of government throughout human history, with various ways of allocating power, and with different levels and means of control over the population.

The stated rationale for cryonics is that people who are considered dead by current legal or medical definitions, may not necessarily be dead according to the more stringent 'information-theoretic' definition of death.

A patient with working heart and lungs determined to be brain dead can be pronounced legally dead without clinical death occurring.

=== Ceramic art ===

Ceramic art is art made from ceramic materials, which may take forms such as pottery, tiles, figurines, sculptures, and tableware.

In heterosexual romantic relationships, men are typically expected to take a proactive role, initiate the relationship, plan dates, and propose marriage.

Social history is a broad field investigating social phenomena, but its precise definition is disputed.

99.)

Prior to the 19th century, poetry was commonly understood to be something set in metrical lines: "any kind of subject consisting of Rhythm or Verses".

In the 20th century, the United States emerged as a dominant global power and a key player in the Cold War.

"Considerations on Death" .

The regress problem is a common issue in relation to the sources of knowledge and the justification they offer.

It therefore covers the effects of computers and telecommunications on the home, the workplace, schools, government, and various communities and organizations, as well as the emergence of new social forms in cyberspace.

== Geography ==

The United States is the world's third-largest country by total area behind Russia and Canada.

It was used in mundane contexts and could mean multiple things from respectful fear to excessive or harmfully distracting practices of others, to cultic practices.

One question is how much an entity can change while still remaining the same entity.

This is partially because death puts a cessation to the possibility of fulfilling any commandments.

Formal instruction in pedagogy began with Jesuit schools in the 16th and 17th century.

As a next step, sometimes termed historical synthesis, historians examine how the individual pieces of evidence fit together to form part of a larger story.

For example, national boundaries frequently override linguistic difference in determining whether two linguistic varieties are languages or dialects.

Precise estimates depend on an arbitrary distinction (dichotomy) established between languages and dialects.

== Classification ==

In the 19th and 20th centuries, the academic practice of comparative religion divided religious belief into philosophically defined categories called world religions.

Digambara Jainism (or sky-clad) is mainly practiced in South India.

Mark Dingemanse... in 2013 found [that] the conversational 'Huh?'

Examples of visual arts include architecture, ceramic art, drawing, filmmaking, painting, photography, and sculpture.

Mathematization of the social sciences is not without risk.

With the large number of new areas of mathematics that have appeared since the beginning of the 20th century, defining mathematics by its object of study has become increasingly difficult.

While "brain death" is viewed as problematic by some scholars, there are proponents of it that believe this definition of death is the most reasonable for distinguishing life from death.

Methodological disagreements can cause conflicts among philosophical theories or about the answers to philosophical questions.

Two days after the Second Continental Congress passed the Lee Resolution to create an independent, sovereign nation, the Declaration was adopted on July 4, 1776.

The second, which includes "think" and "sing", are called verbs.

They expanded the range of topics to questions like how people should act, how to arrive at knowledge, and what the nature of reality and mind is.

As the religion of Byzantine Empire in the first millennium and of Western Europe during the time of colonization, Christianity has been propagated throughout the world via missionary work.

The extensive Interstate Highway System that connects all major U.S. cities is funded mostly by the federal government but maintained by state departments of transportation.

From 1990 to 2007, a study in the U.S. by MIT economist Daron Acemoglu showed that an addition of one robot for every 1,000 workers decreased the employment-to-population ratio by 0.2%, or about 3.3 workers, and lowered wages by 0.42%.

and similar words in other languages may be universal."

Language contact occurs when speakers of two or more languages or varieties interact on a regular basis.

Some theorists use the term historiography in a different sense to refer to written accounts of the past.

Some reject or criticise the concept of Homo economicus.

In the Gulf War of 1991, an American-led international coalition of states expelled an Iraqi invasion force that had occupied neighboring Kuwait.

Awareness of death motivated Prince Siddhartha to strive to find the "deathless" and finally attain enlightenment.

During the 1920s and 1930s, radio for mass communication and early television transformed communications nationwide.

Men are over-represented in dangerous occupations and represent a majority of on the job deaths.

Superstition has been described as the non-rational establishment of cause and effect.

Traditionally, faith, in addition to reason, has been considered a source of religious beliefs.

The aftermath of World War II led to a surge in the development of applied mathematics in the US and elsewhere.

A system of universities developed and spread scientific ideas and practices, including Oxford and Cambridge.

The simple sound change has affected both morphology and syntax.

Academics who study religious movements classify it as a new religious movement or religion.

As US president Lyndon Johnson said in 1964, "Technology is creating both new opportunities and new obligations for us, opportunity for greater productivity and progress; obligation to be sure that no workingman, no family must pay an unjust price for progress."

The U.S. has the highest research and development expenditures of any country and ranks ninth as a percentage of GDP.

=== Anatomy of speech ===

Spoken language relies on human physical ability to produce sound, which is a longitudinal wave propagated through the air at a frequency capable of vibrating the ear drum.

(1856).

Building on the philosophy of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Karl Marx proposed one such general law in his theory of historical materialism, arguing that economic forces and class struggle are the fundamental drivers of historical change.

Mulla Sadra (1571–1636 CE) is often regarded as one of the most influential philosophers of the subsequent period.

Probabilist Nassim Taleb argues that national research programs that implement the notions of serendipity and convexity through frequent trial and error are more likely to lead to useful innovations than research that aims to reach specific outcomes.

For example, rather than yelling, Inuit parents might deter their children from wandering too close to the water's edge by telling a story about a sea monster with a pouch for children within its reach.

Rosenberg D (17 August 2014).

=== Abortion ===

An abortion may be performed for many reasons, such as pregnancy from rape, financial constraints of having a child, teenage pregnancy, and the lack of support from a significant other.

Due to its remoteness and geographical fragmentation, Papua New Guinea emerges in fact as the leading location worldwide for both species (8% of world total) and linguistic richness – with 830 living tongues (12% of world total).

Almost certainly no, given the chain of circumstances that led to our existence.

Some mathematicians can see their activity as a game, more specifically as solving puzzles.

Organized efforts to search for extraterrestrial intelligence have used radio telescopes to detect signs of technology use, or technosignatures, given off by alien civilizations.

The seven undisputed islands without permanent populations are Baker Island, Howland Island, Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Atoll, and Palmyra Atoll.

These deities have distinct and complex personalities yet are often viewed as aspects of the same Ultimate Reality called Brahman.

The Babylonians also possessed a place-value system and used a sexagesimal numeral system which is still in use today for measuring angles and time.

Emerging technologies in the fields of climate engineering may be able to halt or reverse global warming and its environmental impacts, although this remains highly controversial.

While languages have always gone extinct throughout human history, they have been disappearing at an accelerated rate in the 20th and 21st centuries due to the processes of globalization and neo-colonialism, where the economically powerful languages dominate other languages.

The creative work may be in a literary, artistic, educational, or musical form.

The top 20 languages, those spoken by more than 50 million speakers each, are spoken by 50% of the world's population, whereas many of the other languages are spoken by smaller communities, most of them with less than 10,000 speakers.

The country's polarization was violently reflected in the January 2021 Capitol attack, when a mob of insurrectionists entered the U.S. Capitol and sought to prevent the peaceful transfer of power in an attempted self-coup d'état.

There are two broad theoretical camps: those emphasizing the formal truth conditions of sentences and those investigating circumstances that determine when it is suitable to use a sentence, the latter of which is associated with speech act theory.

The world's busiest airport by passenger volume is Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International in Atlanta, Georgia.

It is a creative aspect of historical writing that reconstructs, interprets, and explains what happened by showing how different events are connected.

It is ultimately derived from the Latin word religiō.

Additionally, the advent of life-sustaining therapy and the numerous criteria for defining death from both a medical and legal standpoint have made it difficult to create a single unifying definition.

The U.S. also has many relatively car-dependent localities.

Human language is the only known natural communication system whose adaptability may be referred to as modality independent.

This shows that the impairment is specific to the ability to use language, not to the physiology used for speech production.

Prominent American spaceflight contractors include Blue Origin, Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, and SpaceX.

This list has achieved great celebrity among mathematicians, and at least thirteen of the problems (depending how some are interpreted) have been solved.

U.S. representatives are all up for election at the same time every two years.

In around 2,000 BCE, the Minoans on the Greek island of Crete built a 50 km road leading from the palace of Gortyn on the south side of the island, through the mountains, to the palace of Knossos on the north side of the island.

Their social characteristics are therefore to a large extent an objectively given fact, stamped on them from birth and affirmed by socialization processes; and, according to Marx, in producing and reproducing their material life, people must necessarily enter into relations of production which are "independent of their will".

In the 21st century, the United States continues to be one of the world's foremost scientific powers, though China has emerged as a major competitor in many fields.

Mexican dishes such as burritos and tacos preexisted the United States in areas later annexed from Mexico, and adaptations of Chinese cuisine as well as pasta dishes freely adapted from Italian sources are all widely consumed.

Many religious doctrines stipulate certain rules for men, such as religious circumcision.

There are only 250 countries in the world corresponding to some 6,000 languages, which means that most countries are multilingual and most languages therefore exist in close contact with other languages.

==== Graphic novel ====

Graphic novels and comic books present stories told in a combination of artwork, dialogue, and text.

Language change may be motivated by "language internal" factors, such as changes in pronunciation motivated by certain sounds being difficult to distinguish aurally or to produce, or through patterns of change that cause some rare types of constructions to drift towards more common types.

Though religion may be that which determine the goals, it has, nevertheless, learned from science, in the broadest sense, what means will contribute to the attainment of the goals it has set up."

It can also have a social, psychological, spiritual, or political role.

The oldest known constructed roadways are the stone-paved streets of the city-state of Ur, dating to c. 4,000 BCE, and timber roads leading through the swamps of Glastonbury, England, dating to around the same period.

The colonial population grew rapidly from Maine to Georgia, eclipsing Native American populations; by the 1770s, the natural increase of the population was such that only a small minority of Americans had been born overseas.

Ernst Troeltsch, similarly, looked at culture as the soil of religion and thought that, therefore, transplanting a religion from its original culture to a foreign culture would kill it in the same manner that transplanting a plant from its natural soil to an alien soil would kill it.

Many movie and television celebrities have gotten their big break working in New York productions.

Big History is the branch with the broadest scope, covering everything from the Big Bang to the present, incorporating elements of cosmology, geology, biology, and anthropology.

According to the pragmatic maxim as formulated by Charles Sanders Peirce, the idea a person has of an object is nothing more than the totality of practical consequences they associate with this object.

The first two-wheeled carts were derived from travois and were first used in Mesopotamia and Iran in around 3,000 BCE.

One example of such a classification comes from sociologist Gerhard Lenski who lists: (1) hunting and gathering; (2) horticultural; (3) agricultural; and (4) industrial; as well as specialized societies (e.g., fishing or herding).

Geometry was split into two new subfields: synthetic geometry, which uses purely geometrical methods, and analytic geometry, which uses coordinates systemically.

It asks questions including whether the universe has a beginning and an end and whether it was created by something else.

This further developed into the idea of the study of literature being "the ideal carrier for the propagation of the humanist cultural myth of a well educated, culturally harmonious nation".

Caste systems, as historically found in South Asia, are associated with agrarian societies, where lifelong agricultural routines depend upon a rigid sense of duty and discipline.

The French philosophie is itself a borrowing from the Latin philosophia.

"[I]n the tradition of linguist Noam Chomsky... we use language for thinking: to think is why language evolved in our species.

The problem is that the source of justification may itself be in need of another source of justification.

This emphasis on subjectivities has been extended by postmodernist theories that suggest that it is impossible to know the past objectively, adding that meaning is created through human-made texts, the language of which "constitute our world as we perceive it".

Swedish and Norwegian.

Second-wave philosophers like Ortega later shifted their focus from economics and politics to "daily life and living in a techno-material culture", arguing that technology could oppress "even the members of the bourgeoisie who were its ostensible masters and possessors."

Various methods in philosophy give particular importance to intuitions, that is, non-inferential impressions about the correctness of specific claims or general principles.

Linguists and anthropologists, particularly sociolinguists, ethnolinguists, and linguistic anthropologists have specialized in studying how ways of speaking vary between speech communities.

However, younger animals are more susceptible to predation.

Languages differ widely in how much they rely on morphological processes of word formation.

It considered annals the highest form of historical writing and emphasized verification through sources.

7 (11th ed.).

Comparable evidence has been unearthed for scribal mathematics training in the ancient Near East and then for the Greco-Roman world starting around 300 BCE.

Philosophy is related to many other fields, such as the natural and social sciences, mathematics, business, law, and journalism.

Due to artificial intelligence being far more capable than computers, and still being in its infancy, it is not known whether it will follow the same trend; the question has been debated at length among economists and policymakers.

Mandaeism, sometimes also known as Sabianism (after the mysterious Sabians mentioned in the Quran, a name historically claimed by several religious groups), is a Gnostic, monotheistic and ethnic religion.

The Soviet Union's collapse in 1991 ended the Cold War, leaving the U.S. as the world's sole superpower.

==== Horticultural ====

Fruits and vegetables grown in garden plots, that have been cleared from the jungle or forest, provide the main source of food in a horticultural society.

"Death" (video; 10:18) by Timothy Ferris, producer of the Voyager Golden Record for NASA.

For example, in ancient India, there were large atheistic movements and traditions (Nirīśvaravāda) that rejected the Vedas, such as the atheistic Ājīvika and the Ajñana which taught agnosticism.

Corpse: Nature, Forensics, and the Struggle to Pinpoint Time of Death (270 pages).

=== Modern linguistics ===

In the 1960s, Noam Chomsky formulated the generative theory of language.

In 2023, 51% of Americans age 15 and over were married, 6% were widowed, 10% were divorced, and 34% had never been married.

For example, when asked how he came about his theorems, Gauss once replied "durch planmässiges Tattonieren" (through systematic experimentation).

The discipline of linguistics dedicated to studying the neurological aspects of language is called neurolinguistics.

Thus, he considered that the grammars of individual languages are only of importance to linguistics insofar as they allow us to deduce the universal underlying rules from which the observable linguistic variability is generated.

The most common reason is aging; the most common cause is cardiovascular disease (CVD), which is a disease that affects the heart or blood vessels.

The enduring significance of oral traditions is underscored in a systemic literature review on indigenous languages in South Africa, within the framework of contemporary linguistic challenges.

A critique of Geertz's model by Talal Asad categorized religion as "an anthropological category".

Another form is abductive reasoning.

There is not even consensus on whether mathematics is an art or a science.

Local jails are county or municipal facilities that incarcerate defendants prior to trial; they also hold those serving short sentences (typically under a year).

The leading causes in developed countries are atherosclerosis (heart disease and stroke), cancer, and other diseases related to obesity and aging.

=== Autopsy ===

An autopsy, also known as a postmortem examination or an obduction, is a medical procedure that consists of a thorough examination of a human corpse to determine the cause and manner of a person's death and to evaluate any disease or injury that may be present.

Religion Statistics from UCB Libraries GovPubs
Major Religions of the World Ranked by Number of Adherents by Adherents.com August 2005
Studying Religion Archived 29 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine – Introduction to the methods and scholars of the academic study of religion
A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right – Marx's original reference to religion as the opium of the people.

The 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia have a combined area of 3,119,885 square miles (8,080,470 km2).

An important cultural export during the Jazz Age, these writings were a key influence on Négritude, a philosophy emerging in the 1930s among francophone writers of the African diaspora.

Its mythological framework is similar to a UFO cult and includes references to aliens, but it is kept secret from most followers.

"; "Is a scientific law anything more than a description of a regularity?

The sentence could be directly transliterated as "see you-did-me"


==== Syntax ====

Another way in which languages convey meaning is through the order of words within a sentence.

Congressional oversight is usually delegated to committees and is facilitated by Congress's power to issue subpoenas.

It seeks to form a coherent position on a certain issue by examining all the relevant beliefs and intuitions, some of which often have to be deemphasized or reformulated to arrive at a coherent perspective.

Morphemes can either be free or bound.

=== Other major branches ===

There are many other subfields of philosophy besides its core branches.

It requires attentively thinking long and carefully about the provocative, vexing, and enduring problems central to the human condition.

There are many areas of mathematics, which include number theory (the study of numbers), algebra (the study of formulas and related structures), geometry (the study of shapes and spaces that contain them), analysis (the study of continuous changes), and set theory (presently used as a foundation for all mathematics).

Another topic in metaphysics concerns the problem of identity.

Some scholars assume the development of primitive language-like systems (proto-language) as early as Homo habilis (2.3 million years ago) while others place the development of primitive symbolic communication only with Homo erectus (1.8 million years ago) or Homo heidelbergensis (0.6 million years ago), and the development of language proper with anatomically modern Homo sapiens with the Upper Paleolithic revolution less than 100,000 years ago.

Kurdish religions include the traditional beliefs of the Yazidi, Alevi, and Ahl-e Haqq.

From the late 18th to the early 20th centuries, European global dominance was further solidified by the Industrial Revolution and the establishment of large overseas colonies.

It is composed of four sub-agencies:

National Endowment for the Arts
National Endowment for the Humanities
Institute of Museum and Library Services
Federal Council on the Arts and the Humanities


=== Literature ===

Colonial American authors were influenced by John Locke and other Enlightenment philosophers.

Simple machines (such as the lever, the screw, and the pulley) were combined into more complicated tools, such as the wheelbarrow, windmills, and clocks.

Different schools of thought, such as positivism, the Annales school, Marxism, and postmodernism, have distinct methodological approaches.

Some proponents of Saussure's view of language have advocated a formal approach that studies language structure by identifying its basic elements and then by presenting a formal account of the rules according to which the elements combine in order to form words and sentences.

Hinduism is one of the most ancient of still-active religious belief systems, with origins perhaps as far back as prehistoric times.

A study of conflicts in 13 countries from 1955 to 2002 found that 81% of all violent war deaths were male.

=== Ancient ===

After harnessing fire, humans discovered other forms of energy.

Electoral College.

Fathers are often portrayed in television as either idealized and caring or clumsy and inept.

Anthropoligically, this is also the case where Western terms and concepts like "religion" and "secular" do not exist in other cultures.

This type of morpho-syntax is often called isolating, or analytic, because there is almost a full correspondence between a single word and a single aspect of meaning.

For example, the Stoics saw philosophy as an exercise to train the mind and thereby achieve eudaimonia and flourish in life.

In ergative languages, the single participant in an intransitive sentence, such as "I run", is treated the same as the patient in a transitive sentence, giving the equivalent of "me run".

For example, irredentist attempts by one state to annex territory of another state often rely on historical theories claiming that the disputed territory belonged to the first state in the past.

In the philosophy of language, the view of linguistic meaning as residing in the logical relations between propositions and reality was developed by philosophers such as Alfred Tarski, Bertrand Russell, and other formal logicians.

Constructing this broader perspective is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of the topic as a whole.

==== Pastoral ====

Rather than searching for food on a daily basis, members of a pastoral society rely on domesticated herd animals to meet their food needs.

This ability to refer to events that are not at the same time or place as the speech event is called displacement, and while some animal communication systems can use displacement (such as the communication of bees that can communicate the location of sources of nectar that are out of sight), the degree to which it is used in human language is also considered unique.

Others focus on its topic, for example, as the study of the biggest patterns of the world as a whole or as the attempt to answer the big questions.

The country's economy is fueled by abundant natural resources, a well-developed infrastructure, and high productivity.

An example of the cultural and critical role of philosophy is found in its influence on the feminist movement through philosophers such as Mary Wollstonecraft, Simone de Beauvoir, and Judith Butler.

It is supplemented by oral tradition, set down in written form in later texts such as the Midrash and the Talmud.

After a proof has been accepted for many years or even decades, it can then be considered as reliable.

Religiō was most often used by the ancient Romans not in the context of a relation towards gods, but as a range of general emotions which arose from heightened attention in any mundane context such as hesitation, caution, anxiety, or fear, as well as feelings of being bound, restricted, or inhibited.

After American football, the next four most popular professional team sports are basketball, baseball, soccer, and ice hockey.

In the study of modern history, which began at the end of the 18th century, historians are interested in how the Industrial Revolution transformed economies by introducing more efficient modes of production.

This rule explains why when in English, the phrase "John is talking to Lucy" is turned into a question, it becomes "Who is John talking to?

The new English styles would have been early enough to make a considerable impact on American folk art, but American styles and forms had already been firmly adopted.

Mandaeans are the last surviving Gnostics from antiquity.

The country ranks first in the world by nominal GDP, second when adjusted for purchasing power parities (PPP), and ninth by PPP-adjusted GDP per capita.

They include nanotechnology, biotechnology, robotics, 3D printing, and blockchains.

It critically reflects on what religion is, how to define the divine, and whether one or more gods exist.

=== Industrial ===

Industrial societies, which emerged in the 18th century in the Industrial Revolution, rely heavily on machines powered by external sources for the mass production of goods.

Originally, these objects were elements or subsets of a given set; this has been extended to various objects, which establishes a strong link between combinatorics and other parts of discrete mathematics.

In addition to studying intellectual movements themselves, it also examines the cultural and social contexts that shaped them and their influence on other historical developments.

Flag desecration, hate speech, blasphemy, and lese majesty are all forms of protected expression.

With few exceptions, newspapers are privately owned, either by large chains such as Gannett or McClatchy, which own dozens or even hundreds of newspapers; by small chains that own a handful of papers; or, in an increasingly rare situation, by individuals or families.

The Tony Awards recognizes excellence in live Broadway theater and are presented at an annual ceremony in Manhattan.

Some recent scholarship has argued that not all types of religion are necessarily separated by mutually exclusive philosophies, and furthermore that the utility of ascribing a practice to a certain philosophy, or even calling a given practice religious, rather than cultural, political, or social in nature, is limited.

The Chinese inventor Bi Sheng made movable type of earthenware c. 1045 and was spread to Korea later.

Furthermore, philosophical inquiry sometimes overlaps with other disciplines in the natural and social sciences, religion, and mathematics.

In the 1960s, Bob Dylan emerged from the folk revival to become one of the country's most celebrated songwriters.

Autopsies are either performed for legal or medical purposes.

The first group, which includes English words such as "dog" and "song", are usually called nouns.

This is generally a steady decline until matching ambient temperature
Rigor mortis, the limbs of the corpse become stiff (Latin rigor) and difficult to move or manipulate
Putrefaction, the beginning signs of decomposition
Decomposition, the reduction into simpler forms of matter, accompanied by a strong, unpleasant odor.

Alluding perhaps to Tylor's "deeper motive", Geertz remarked that:

... we have very little idea of how, in empirical terms, this particular miracle is accomplished.

An example of the first case is the theory of distributions, introduced by Laurent Schwartz for validating computations done in quantum mechanics, which became immediately an important tool of (pure) mathematical analysis.

Other definitions see social history as the study of social problems, like poverty, disease, and crime, or take a broader perspective by examining how whole societies developed.

It studies the categories of being and asks what exists on the most fundamental level.

Mainstream theater in the United States derives from the old European theatrical tradition and has been heavily influenced by the British theater.

Law in the United States is mainly enforced by local police departments and sheriff departments in their municipal or county jurisdictions.

=== Aesthetic value ===


== The influence of religious texts ==

Religion has had a major influence on literature, through works like the Vedas, the Torah, the Bible,
and the Quran.

During the Age of Enlightenment in the 18th century, historical writing was influenced by rationalism and scepticism.

A key topic in metaphysics concerns the question of whether reality only consists of physical things like matter and energy.

As closely related fields, the history of philosophy investigates the development of philosophical thought while the history of science studies the evolution of scientific theories and practices, such as the scientific contributions of Charles Darwin and Albert Einstein.

Language is processed in many different locations in the human brain, but especially in Broca's and Wernicke's areas.

Local community colleges generally offer open admissions, lower tuition, and coursework leading to a two-year associate degree or a non-degree certificate.

The U.S. developed the first nuclear weapons and used them against the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, ending the war.

It was the lingua franca among literate Europeans until quite recent times, and the great works of Descartes (1596 – 1650), Francis Bacon (1561 – 1626), and Baruch Spinoza (1632 – 1677) were published in Latin.

A man is an adult male human.

It further asks under what circumstances the use of political power is legitimate, rather than a form of simple violence.

Now and At the Hour of Our Death.

Linguistic differences may become salient markers of divisions between social groups, for example, speaking a language with a particular accent may imply membership of an ethnic minority or social class, one's area of origin, or status as a second language speaker.

Pidgin languages are defined by not having any native speakers, but only being spoken by people who have another language as their first language.

== Criticism ==

Criticism of religion is criticism of the ideas, the truth, or the practice of religion, including its political and social implications.

Artists have had an uneasy relationship with their critics.

Source criticism is used to evaluate these sources, assessing their authenticity, content, and reliability.

White Americans with ancestry from Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa form the largest racial and ethnic group at 57.8% of the United States population.

It is sometimes understood as a meta-discipline that clarifies their nature and limits.

The Missouri Compromise of 1820, which admitted Missouri as a slave state and Maine as a free state, attempted to balance the desire of northern states to prevent the expansion of slavery into new territories with that of southern states to extend it there.

So far as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways that would otherwise be difficult on an individual basis.

==== United States ====
The copyright law of the United States has a long and complicated history, dating back to colonial times.

Thucydides followed and further refined Herodotus's approach but focused more on particular political and military developments in contrast to the wide scope and ethnographic elements of Herodotus's work.

The ashes left after a cremation are lately called "cremains".

One approach to this issue is that taken by the Catholic Church, which declared in 1963 that the arts are "not exempt" from "the absolute primacy of the objective moral order".

The Homeric epics were the greatest influence on ancient Greek culture and education; to Plato, Homer was simply the one who "has taught Greece" – ten Hellada pepaideuken.

Religion is the organization of life around the depth dimensions of experience—varied in form, completeness, and clarity in accordance with the environing culture.

Vajrayana Buddhism first appeared in India in the 3rd century CE.

"; and "What is the human being?"

== Relation to other fields ==

Philosophy is closely related to many other fields.

It is considered that organisms less adapted to their environment are more likely to die, having produced fewer offspring, thereby reducing their contribution to the gene pool.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

There are, however, two general definition systems: the sociological/functional and the phenomenological/philosophical.

Mathematics has developed a rich terminology covering a broad range of fields that study the properties of various abstract, idealized objects and how they interact.

Archaeological, dietary, and social evidence point to "continuous [human] fire-use" at least 1.5 Mya.

For instance, same-sex marriage and abortion were illegal in many European countries until recently, following Christian (usually Catholic) doctrine.

In the 18th and 19th centuries, the terms Buddhism, Hinduism, Taoism, Confucianism, and world religions first entered the English language.

== Death before birth ==
Death before birth can happen in several ways: stillbirth, when the fetus dies before or during the delivery process; miscarriage, when the embryo dies before independent survival; and abortion, the artificial termination of the pregnancy.

Many of them differ significantly from the methods used in the natural sciences in that they do not use experimental data obtained through measuring equipment.

Deductively valid arguments follow a rule of inference, like modus ponens, which has the following logical form: "p; if p then q; therefore q".

Though considered a cultural universal, the definition of music varies throughout the world as it is based on diverse views of nature, the supernatural, and humanity.

The terms "carrion" and "carcass" are also used, usually for dead non-human animals.

The apparent plural form in English goes back to the Latin neuter plural mathematica (Cicero), based on the Greek plural ta mathēmatiká (τὰ μαθηματικά) and means roughly "all things mathematical", although it is plausible that English borrowed only the adjective mathematic(al) and formed the noun mathematics anew, after the pattern of physics and metaphysics, inherited from Greek.

The current state of psychological study about the nature of religiousness suggests that it is better to refer to religion as a largely invariant phenomenon that should be distinguished from cultural norms (i.e.

The major film studios of the United States are the primary source of the most commercially successful movies selling the most tickets in the world.

A fundamental innovation was the ancient Greeks' introduction of the concept of proofs, which require that every assertion must be proved.

One of these doctrines includes the belief that Al-Ḥākim bi-Amr Allāh was an incarnation of God.

The animal dies when this resource is exhausted.

During the Renaissance, two more areas appeared.

Death in warfare and suicide attacks also have cultural links, and the ideas of dulce et decorum est pro patria mori, which translates to "It is sweet and proper to die for one's country", is a concept that dates to antiquity.

Many of the theories developed for applications were found interesting from the point of view of pure mathematics, and many results of pure mathematics were shown to have applications outside mathematics; in turn, the study of these applications may give new insights on the "pure theory".

In ancient China, early literature was primarily focused on philosophy, historiography, military science, agriculture, and poetry.

The first Spanish colony in the present-day continental United States was Spanish Florida, chartered in 1513.

=== Education ===

History is part of the school curriculum in most countries.

Societies are characterized by patterns of relationships (social relations) between individuals who share a distinctive culture and institutions; a given society may be described as the sum total of such relationships among its constituent members.

The Sino-Tibetan languages are spoken by 20% of the world's population and include many of the languages of East Asia, including Hakka, Mandarin Chinese, Cantonese, and hundreds of smaller languages.

Australian Aboriginal culture has thrived on oral traditions and oral histories passed down through tens of thousands of years.

=== Other fields ===
History employs an interdisciplinary methodology, drawing on findings from fields such as archaeology, geology, genetics, anthropology, and linguistics.

The president appoints the members of the Cabinet, subject to Senate approval, and names other officials who administer and enforce federal law and policy through their respective agencies.

Because these phenomena operate outside of the level of single segments, they are called suprasegmental.

An extreme example is Apery's theorem: Roger Apery provided only the ideas for a proof, and the formal proof was given only several months later by three other mathematicians.

Mortality salience is the awareness that death is inevitable.

Geology and other earth sciences help historians understand the environmental contexts and physical processes that affected past societies, including climate conditions, landscapes, and natural events.

It is distinguished by the property of recursivity: for example, a noun phrase can contain another noun phrase (as in "[[the chimpanzee]'s lips]") or a clause can contain another clause (as in "[I see [the dog is running]]").

The first Roman aqueduct was built in 312 BCE.

In the Quran, the Arabic word din is often translated as religion in modern translations, but up to the mid-1600s translators expressed din as "law."

All languages rely on the process of semiosis to relate signs to particular meanings.

Chinese philosophy focuses principally on practical issues about right social conduct, government, and self-cultivation.

In 2012, suicide overtook car crashes as the leading cause of human injury deaths in the U.S., followed by poisoning, falls, and murder.

Other areas of computational mathematics include computer algebra and symbolic computation.

A key question in aesthetics is whether beauty is an objective feature of entities or a subjective aspect of experience.

Some organisms, such as the immortal jellyfish, are biologically immortal; however, they can still die from means other than the effects of aging.

Advocates of the rule believe that the rule is legitimate in protecting organ donors while also countering any moral or legal objection to organ procurement.

=== Other traditions ===
Traditional Japanese philosophy assimilated and synthesized ideas from different traditions, including the indigenous Shinto religion and Chinese and Indian thought in the forms of Confucianism and Buddhism, both of which entered Japan in the 6th and 7th centuries.

Modern men increasingly take untraditional career paths, such as staying home and raising children while their partner works.

Something that is not considered an organism may be said "to die" in a figurative sense when it reaches an inactive state, such as when a star runs out of fuel.

The Scientific Revolution prompted major discoveries and accelerated technological progress.

Native copper does not naturally occur in large amounts, but copper ores are quite common and some of them produce metal easily when burned in wood or charcoal fires.

This definition stresses that human languages can be described as closed structural systems consisting of rules that relate particular signs to particular meanings.

Both acts are understood very differently in different cultures.

Singularitarians believe that machine superintelligence will "accelerate technological progress" by orders of magnitude and "create even more intelligent entities ever faster", which may lead to a pace of societal and technological change that is "incomprehensible" to us.

Proponents of the view that the drive to language acquisition is innate in humans argue that this is supported by the fact that all cognitively normal children raised in an environment where language is accessible will acquire language without formal instruction.

There can be some similarities between myths and cultures.

This is because the vowel shift brought the already established orthography out of synchronization with pronunciation.

=== Etymology ===

The word history comes from the Ancient Greek term ἵστωρ (histōr), meaning 'learned, wise man'.

This developed as a performance associated with religious and civic festivals, typically enacting or developing upon well-known historical, or mythological themes,
In the twentieth century, scripts written for non-stage media have been added to this form, including radio, television and film.

Syd Field described his discipline, screenwriting, as "a craft that occasionally rises to the level of art."

Therefore, in addition to its strictly communicative uses, language has social uses such as signifying group identity, social stratification, as well as use for social grooming and entertainment.

Cognitive linguistics is primarily concerned with how the mind creates meaning through language.

People design, manufacture, and decorate pottery in pottery or ceramic factories.

Artists usually need positive opinions from critics for their work to be viewed and purchased.

In 2022, 6.4 million children experienced food insecurity.

With more than 1,100,000 acres (4,500 km2) under vine, the United States is the fourth-largest wine-producing country in the world, after Italy, Spain, and France.

Consonant sounds vary by place of articulation, i.e.

The language family of the world that has the most speakers is the Indo-European languages, spoken by 46% of the world's population.

Victory in the 1775–1783 Revolutionary War brought international recognition of U.S. sovereignty and fueled westward expansion, further dispossessing native inhabitants.

== Etymology and history of the concept of "religion" ==


=== Etymology ===

The term religion comes from both Old French and Anglo-Norman (1200s CE) and means respect for sense of right, moral obligation, sanctity, what is sacred, reverence for the gods.

In 2019, Hawaiian TV company Oiwi visited a Welsh language centre in Nant Gwrtheyrn, North Wales, to help find ways of preserving their Ōlelo Hawaiʻi language.

Domenic Marbaniang has argued that elements grounded on beliefs of a metaphysical nature (religious) are distinct from elements grounded on nature and the natural (cultural).

== See also ==


== References ==


=== Notes ===


=== Citations ===


=== Bibliography ===


== External links ==

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy – a peer-reviewed online encyclopedia of philosophy
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy – an online encyclopedia of philosophy maintained by Stanford University
PhilPapers – a comprehensive directory of online philosophical articles and books by academic philosophers
Internet Philosophy Ontology Project – a model of relationships between philosophical ideas, thinkers, and journals

Religion is a range of social-cultural systems, including designated behaviors and practices, ethics, morals, beliefs, worldviews, texts, sanctified places, prophecies, or organizations, that generally relate humanity to supernatural, transcendental, and spiritual elements—although there is no scholarly consensus over what precisely constitutes a religion.

Latin American philosophy during the colonial period, starting around 1550, was dominated by religious philosophy in the form of scholasticism.

It also involves more general considerations about the evolution of warfare, including advancements in military technology, strategies, tactics, logistics, and institutions.

Sign forms must be something that can be perceived, for example, in sounds, images, or gestures, and then related to a specific meaning by social convention.

=== Painting ===

Painting is considered to be a form of self-expression.

The California gold rush of 1848–1849 spurred a huge migration of white settlers to the Pacific coast, leading to even more confrontations with Native populations.

Present-day societies vary in their degree of industrialization, with some using mostly newer energy sources (e.g.

It was mostly undisputed that pre-human australopithecines did not have communication systems significantly different from those found in great apes in general.

Word classes also carry out differing functions in grammar.

In the same period, various areas of mathematics concluded the former intuitive definitions of the basic mathematical objects were insufficient for ensuring mathematical rigour.

=== Languages and dialects ===

There is no clear distinction between a language and a dialect, notwithstanding a famous aphorism attributed to linguist Max Weinreich that "a language is a dialect with an army and navy".

== Definition ==

The arts are considered various practices or objects done by people with skill, creativity, and imagination across cultures and history.

Selye proposed a unified non-specific approach to many causes of death.

In particular, the issue of wearing religious symbols in public, such as headscarves that are banned in French schools, have received scholarly attention in the context of human rights and feminism.

The invention of the first writing systems is roughly contemporary with the beginning of the Bronze Age in the late 4th millennium BC.

They include the French histoire, the Italian storia, and the German Geschichte.

Around 1230, Koreans invented a metal type movable printing.

In Brazil, death is counted officially when it is registered by existing family members at a cartório, a government-authorized registry.

They concluded that this approach to defining death sufficed in reaching a uniform definition nationwide.

There, votes are officially cast by individual electors selected by their state legislature.

On the contrary, a sacred thing can be "a rock, a tree, a spring, a pebble, a piece of wood, a house, in a word, anything can be sacred."

They include:


==== Taoism and Confucianism ====

Taoism and Confucianism, as well as Korean, Vietnamese, and Japanese religion influenced by Chinese thought.

The subject of combinatorics has been studied for much of recorded history, yet did not become a separate branch of mathematics until the 17th century.

Livestock have a 6% death rate from predation.

In the field of comparative religion, a common geographical classification of the main world religions includes Middle Eastern religions (including Zoroastrianism and Iranian religions), Indian religions, East Asian religions, African religions, American religions, Oceanic religions, and classical Hellenistic religions.

=== By geographic location ===
Areas of historical study can also be categorized by the geographic locations they examine.

Psychologist Maslow's ideas help literary critics understand how characters in literature reflect their personal culture and the history.

It is an essentially contested concept.

East metal movable type was spread to Europe between the late 14th century and early 15th century.

At present, there are also dozens of language isolates: languages that cannot be shown to be related to any other languages in the world.

Similarly, for the theologian Paul Tillich, faith is "the state of being ultimately concerned", which "is itself religion.

Universal education, meaning state-provided primary and secondary education independent of gender, is not yet a global norm, even if it is assumed in most developed countries.

In this new sense, the term is mainly associated with disciplines like metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics.

Since the 1990s, droughts in the American Southwest have become more persistent and more severe.

The Sumerian archaic cuneiform script and the Egyptian hieroglyphs are generally considered to be the earliest writing systems, both emerging out of their ancestral proto-literate symbol systems from 3400 to 3200 BC with the earliest coherent texts from about 2600 BC.

Eliot suggested that while "the distinction between verse and prose is clear, the distinction between poetry and prose is obscure".

=== Contact ===

One source of language change is contact and the resulting diffusion of linguistic traits between languages.

In Asia, the transmission of folklore, mythologies as well as scriptures in ancient India, in different Indian religions, was by oral tradition, preserved with precision with the help of elaborate mnemonic techniques.

It is also known as theory of knowledge and aims to understand what knowledge is, how it arises, what its limits are, and what value it has.

Khaldun conceptualized social structures as having two fundamental forms: nomadic and sedentary.

The House of Representatives has 435 members, elected for a two-year term by the constituency of the congressional district where they reside.

The advantages of copper tools over stone, bone and wooden tools were quickly apparent to early humans, and native copper was probably used from near the beginning of Neolithic times (about 10 kya).

The term philosophy acquired the meanings of "advanced study of the speculative subjects (logic, ethics, physics, and metaphysics)", "deep wisdom consisting of love of truth and virtuous living", "profound learning as transmitted by the ancient writers", and "the study of the fundamental nature of knowledge, reality, and existence, and the basic limits of human understanding".

Computer ethics focuses on issues related to computing.

A wide branch of technology ethics is concerned with the ethics of artificial intelligence: it includes robot ethics, which deals with ethical issues involved in the design, construction, use, and treatment of robots, as well as machine ethics, which is concerned with ensuring the ethical behavior of artificially intelligent agents.

Technology plays a critical role in science, engineering, and everyday life.

The terms macrohistory, mesohistory, and microhistory refer to different scales of analysis, ranging from large-scale patterns that affect the whole globe to detailed studies of local contexts, small communities, family histories, particular individuals, or specific events.

All languages contain the semantic structure of predication: a structure that predicates a property, state, or action.

Humans also frequently speak more than one language, acquiring their first language or languages as children, or learning new languages as they grow up.

Voicing is what separates English [s] in bus (unvoiced sibilant) from [z] in buzz (voiced sibilant).

"The Origin of Death".

While this number varies across cultures, this had led to theories about a number of influential religious phenomena and possible relation to psychotic disorders.

Determining when death has occurred is difficult, as cessation of life functions is often not simultaneous across organ systems.

== Entertainment and media ==
Media portrayals of men often replicate traditional understanding of masculinity.

Since its beginning, mathematics was primarily divided into geometry and arithmetics (the manipulation of natural numbers and fractions) until the 16th and 17th centuries, when algebra and infinitesimal calculus were introduced as new fields.

An example of the second case is the decidability of the first-order theory of the real numbers, a problem of pure mathematics that was proved true by Alfred Tarski, with an algorithm that is impossible to implement because of a computational complexity that is much too high.

The reasoning behind the support for this definition is that brain death has a set of criteria that is reliable and reproducible.

In these traditional areas of mathematical statistics, a statistical-decision problem is formulated by minimizing an objective function, like expected loss or cost, under specific constraints.

The afterlife, or akhirah, is one of the six main beliefs in Islam.

The Latin alphabet (and those on which it is based or that have been derived from it) was originally based on the representation of single sounds, so that words were constructed from letters that generally denote a single consonant or vowel in the structure of the word.

These and other events exacerbated tensions between North and South that would culminate in the American Civil War (1861–1865).

Starting in the 15th century, European exploration and colonization interconnected the globe, while cultural, intellectual, and scientific developments transformed Western societies.

American Samoa was acquired by the United States in 1900 after the Second Samoan Civil War.

It was eventually solved in mainstream mathematics by systematizing the axiomatic method inside a formalized set theory.

He also emphasized the cultural reality of religion, which he defined as:

... the entirety of the linguistic expressions, emotions and, actions and signs that refer to a supernatural being or supernatural beings.

They pursued political and economic integration in the aftermath of the Cold War.

The reason sentences can be seen as being composed of phrases is because each phrase would be moved around as a single element if syntactic operations were carried out.

Some thinkers believe that this may shatter our sense of self, and have urged for renewed public debate exploring the issue more thoroughly; others fear that directed evolution could lead to eugenics or extreme social inequality.

ISBN 978-1-908276-62-9.

==== Brain death ====

Today, where a definition of the moment of death is required, doctors and coroners usually turn to "brain death" or "biological death" to define a person as being dead; people are considered dead when the electrical activity in their brain ceases.

Because of the increased language contact in the globalizing world, many small languages are becoming endangered as their speakers shift to other languages that afford the possibility to participate in larger and more influential speech communities.

Tobacco smoking killed 100 million people worldwide in the 20th century and could kill 1 billion people worldwide in the 21st century, a World Health Organization report warned.

19th century sociologists Auguste Comte and Émile Durkheim, for example, believed that society constitutes a separate "level" of reality, distinct from both biological and inorganic matter.

Polish philosopher Henryk Skolimowski framed it like so: "science concerns itself with what is, technology with what is to be."

Religion does not have a method per se partly because religions emerge through time from diverse cultures and it is an attempt to find meaning in the world, and to explain humanity's place in it and relationship to it and to any posited entities.

News sources, politicians and counter-cult organisations have characterised it in similar terms, or as a cult.

At the same time, history aligns closely with the humanities because of its reliance on subjective aspects associated with interpretation, storytelling, human experience, and cultural heritage.

Developments in print technology have allowed an ever-growing distribution and proliferation of written works, while the digital era has blurred the lines between online electronic literature and other forms of modern media.

The study of religion and morality can be contentious due to ethnocentric views on morality, failure to distinguish between in group and out group altruism, and inconsistent definitions of religiosity.

Conversely, in Latin, both Dominus servos vituperabat and Servos vituperabat dominus mean "the master was reprimanding the slaves", because servos, or "slaves", is in the accusative case, showing that they are the grammatical object of the sentence, and dominus, or "master", is in the nominative case, showing that he is the subject.

This happens, for example, when a doctor diagnoses a disease based on the observed symptoms.

The emergence of Chinese Marxism—which focused on class struggle, socialism, and communism—resulted in a significant transformation of the political landscape.

319, no.

Marxist philosophy and its exposition of communism was one of the factors in the Russian Revolution and the Chinese Communist Revolution.

Even though language change is often initially evaluated negatively by speakers of the language who often consider changes to be "decay" or a sign of slipping norms of language usage, it is natural and inevitable.

Trump also ended U.S. intelligence sharing with the country, but this too was eventually restored.

Other areas are developed independently from any application (and are therefore called pure mathematics) but often later find practical applications.

It was in the 19th century that the terms Buddhism, Hinduism, Taoism, and Confucianism first emerged.

This ability depends on the physiology of the human speech organs.

Pragmatics is concerned with the ways in which language use is patterned and how these patterns contribute to meaning.

They argue that statements can only be objective within or relative to one of several competing historical perspectives.

During the Enlightenment and its debates about human origins, it became fashionable to speculate about the origin of language.

In its Dred Scott decision of 1857, the Supreme Court ruled against a slave brought into non-slave territory, simultaneously declaring the entire Missouri Compromise to be unconstitutional.

=== Calculus and analysis ===

Calculus, formerly called infinitesimal calculus, was introduced independently and simultaneously by 17th-century mathematicians Newton and Leibniz.

The practice of modern art, for example, is a testament to the shifting boundaries, improvisation and experimentation, reflexive nature, and self-criticism or questioning that art and its conditions of production, reception, and possibility can undergo.

The University of Waikato is using the Welsh language as a model for their Māori language revitalisation programme, as they deem Welsh to be the world's leading example for the survival of languages.

Homer's epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey, are central works of ancient Greek literature.

Eventually, the criterion for death may be the permanent and irreversible loss of cognitive function, as evidenced by the death of the cerebral cortex.

The United States has the third-largest combined armed forces in the world, behind the Chinese People's Liberation Army and Indian Armed Forces.

The most notable achievement of Islamic mathematics was the development of algebra.

Therefore, the concept of information-theoretic death has been suggested as a better means of defining when true death occurs, though the concept has few practical applications outside the field of cryonics.

He developed formulas for calculating the surface area and volume of solids of revolution and used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, in a manner not too dissimilar from modern calculus.

The philosophy of religion investigates the basic concepts, assumptions, and arguments associated with religion.

Electrical components are similar in this fashion, in the case that it may not be able to be used again, such as after a spill of water on the components, the component can be considered dead.

He translated and interpreted many works of Aristotle and Neoplatonists in his attempt to show that there is a harmony between reason and faith.

"Causes of Death".

This practice was refined 75 kya (thousand years ago) into pressure flaking, enabling much finer work.

Pragmatists have also used this method to expose disagreements as merely verbal, that is, to show they make no genuine difference on the level of consequences.

==== Religiō ====

In classic antiquity, religiō broadly meant conscientiousness, sense of right, moral obligation, or duty to anything.

330."

=== Acquisition ===

All healthy, normally developing human beings learn to use language.

Similarly, meteorology, oceanography, and planetology also use mathematics due to their heavy use of models.

The Christian faith is essentially faith in Jesus as the Christ, the Son of God, and as Savior and Lord.

Alaska was purchased from Russia in 1867.

This type of death where circulatory and respiratory arrest happens is known as the circulatory definition of death (CDD).

There are also several Islamic republics, including Iran, Pakistan, Mauritania, and Afghanistan.

== Society and culture ==

In society, the nature of death and humanity's awareness of its mortality has, for millennia, been a concern of the world's religious traditions and philosophical inquiry.

For instance, Christianity is often categorized as a historical religion because it is centred around historical events surrounding Jesus Christ.

Michael Stausberg gives an overview of contemporary theories of religion, including cognitive and biological approaches.

These kinds of definitions are often applied in studies of language within a cognitive science framework and in neurolinguistics.

==== Problems in medical practice ====
Aside from the issue of support of or dispute against brain death, there is another inherent problem in this categorical definition: the variability of its application in medical practice.

It aims to answer questions such as how words are related to things and how language affects human thought and understanding.

For example, in many Indo-European languages, adjectives must cross-reference the noun they modify in terms of number, case, and gender, so that the Latin adjective bonus, or "good", is inflected to agree with a noun that is masculine gender, singular number, and nominative case.

== External links ==

World Atlas of Language Structures: a large database of structural (phonological, grammatical, lexical) properties of languages
Ethnologue: Languages of the World is a comprehensive catalog of all of the world's known living languages

Literature is any collection of written work, but it is also used more narrowly for writings specifically considered to be an art form, especially novels, plays, and poems.

Folk religions of the Americas: Native American religions
Folk religions are often omitted as a category in surveys even in countries where they are widely practiced, e.g., in China.

In modern times, this term is more commonly associated with the corpses of animals.

On the other hand, sound changes can sometimes be sporadic, affecting only one particular word or a few words, without any seeming regularity.

Aristotle defined mathematics as "the science of quantity" and this definition prevailed until the 18th century.

==== Other ====
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam are the three most popular Abrahamic faiths, however there are smaller and newer traditions that lay claim to the designation of Abrahamic as well.

Religious content is also common in temporal lobe epilepsy, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Since the start of the 20th century, chemistry has used computing to model molecules in three dimensions.

Algebra and calculus do not appear as first-level areas but are respectively split into several first-level areas.

Modern scholarship has shifted towards an analysis of sociotechnical systems, "assemblages of things, people, practices, and meanings", looking at the value judgments that shape technology.

I'm gonna).

== Life extension ==

Life extension refers to an increase in maximum or average lifespan, especially in humans, by slowing or reversing aging processes through anti-aging measures.

The belief that the stream of consciousness is preserved after physical death is described by the term afterlife.

Some distinctions focus on the scope of the studied topic.

In the 1st century CE, Josephus had used the Greek term ioudaismos (Judaism) as an ethnic term and was not linked to modern abstract concepts of religion or a set of beliefs.

In all cultures in the past, and still among traditional and non-Western cultures, getting married is the most common and definitive distinction between boyhood and manhood.

Governments use information technologies to exert greater control over the populace.

A child's first utterances are holophrases (literally "whole-sentences"), utterances that use just one word to communicate some idea.

Al-Tabari wrote a comprehensive history, spanning from the creation of the world to his present day.

", and not "John is talking to who?".

Some people follow multiple religions or multiple religious principles at the same time, regardless of whether or not the religious principles they follow traditionally allow for syncretism.

Counterfactual history uses counterfactual thinking to examine alternative courses of history, exploring what could have happened under different circumstances.

American restaurants developed the drive-in format in the 1920s, which they began to replace with the drive-through format by the 1940s.

==== Word classes ====
Languages organize their parts of speech into classes according to their functions and positions relative to other parts.

The four major broadcast television networks are all commercial entities.

The Torah is its foundational text, and is part of the larger text known as the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible.

Trans men have a male gender identity that does not align with their female sex assignment at birth, and may undergo masculinizing hormone replacement therapy and/or sex reassignment surgery.

The field employs methods and theories from a very broad range of disciplines, including: cognitive psychology, evolutionary psychology, cognitive anthropology, artificial intelligence, cognitive neuroscience, neurobiology, zoology, and ethology.

Affine geometry, the study of properties relative to parallelism and independent from the concept of length.

First language acquisition proceeds in a fairly regular sequence, though there is a wide degree of variation in the timing of particular stages among normally developing infants.

Etymologically, the term derives from Latin literatura/litteratura, "learning, writing, grammar," originally "writing formed with letters," from litera/littera, "letter."

Other causes of language change are social, such as when certain pronunciations become emblematic of membership in certain groups, such as social classes, or with ideologies, and therefore are adopted by those who wish to identify with those groups or ideas.

This often brings students through the 12th grade, the final year of a U.S. high school, but some states and territories allow them to leave school earlier, at age 16 or 17.

He paused all military aid to Ukraine in March 2025, although the aid resumed later.

They may return to the original land several years later and begin the process again.

An important area in metaphysics is ontology.

These are used in linguistics, economics, sociology, and psychology.

== Etymology ==

The English term "man" is derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *man- (see Sanskrit/Avestan manu-, Slavic mǫž "man, male").

For many impoverished families, the indirect costs and burden of filing for a death lead to a more appealing, unofficial, local, and cultural burial, which, in turn, raises the debate about inaccurate mortality rates.

Throughout the 1850s, the sectional conflict regarding slavery was further inflamed by national legislation in the U.S. Congress and decisions of the Supreme Court.

Many world religions are also organized religions, most definitively including the Abrahamic religions Christianity, Islam, Judaism, and the Baháʼí Faith, while others are arguably less so, in particular folk religions, indigenous religions, and some Eastern religions.

In multicellular organisms and also in multinucleate ciliates with a Weismannist development, that is, with a division of labor between mortal somatic (body) cells and "immortal" germ (reproductive) cells, death becomes an essential part of life, at least for the somatic line.

Without mathematical modeling, it is hard to go beyond statistical observations or untestable speculation.

Protestantism, separated from the Catholic Church in the 16th-century Protestant Reformation and is split into thousands of denominations.

A 2017 survey of 80,929 Minnesota students found that roughly twice as many female-assigned adolescents self-identified as transgender, compared to adolescents with a male sex assignment.

Many notable mathematicians from this period were Persian, such as Al-Khwarizmi, Omar Khayyam and Sharaf al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī.

Near-death experiences (NDEs) describe the subjective experiences associated with impending death.

Deities in Hinduism are referred to as Deva (masculine) and Devi (feminine).

Music is differentiated into composition and performance, while musical improvisation may be regarded as an intermediary tradition.

A global poll in 2012 surveyed 57 countries and reported that 59% of the world's population identified as religious, 23% as not religious, 13% as convinced atheists, and also a 9% decrease in identification as religious when compared to the 2005 average from 39 countries.

=== Mythology ===

The word myth has several meanings:

A traditional story of ostensibly historical events that serves to unfold part of the world view of a people or explain a practice, belief, or natural phenomenon;
A person or thing having only an imaginary or unverifiable existence; or
A metaphor for the spiritual potentiality in the human being.

From 1865 through 1917, an unprecedented stream of immigrants arrived in the United States, including 24.4 million from Europe.

Native population estimates of what is now the United States before the arrival of European colonizers range from around 500,000 to nearly 10 million.

Beginning in 2014, the U.S. had become a key ally of Ukraine.

=== Relationships ===

Platonic relationships are not significantly different between men and women, though some differences do exist.

Historians further rely on evidence from various other fields belonging to the physical, biological, and social sciences as well as the humanities.

Moreover, most mathematicians were also scientists, and many scientists were also mathematicians.

The United States regularly supplies Taiwan with military equipment to deter potential Chinese aggression.

As a result, African Americans took an active political role in ex-Confederate states in the decade following the Civil War.

It is also the product of the dominant Western religious mode, what is called the Judeo-Christian climate or, more accurately, the theistic inheritance from Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.

"; and "Can some special sciences be explained entirely in the terms of a more general science?"

On the historical development of prose, Richard Graff notes that, in the case of ancient Greece, "recent scholarship has emphasized the fact that formal prose was a comparatively late development, an 'invention' properly associated with the classical period".

The dual meaning, referring to both mere stories and factual accounts of the past, is present in the terms for history in many other European languages.

Afterward, a death certificate is issued in most jurisdictions, either by a doctor or by an administrative office, upon presentation of a doctor's declaration of death.

The primary genres of the literature of ancient Egypt—didactic texts, hymns and prayers, and tales—were written almost entirely in verse; By the Old Kingdom (26th century BC to 22nd century BC), literary works included funerary texts, epistles and letters, hymns and poems, and commemorative autobiographical texts recounting the careers of prominent administrative officials.

In another example, the ritual language Damin had a heavily reduced oral vocabulary of only a few hundred words, each of which was very general in meaning, but which were supplemented by gesture for greater precision (e.g., the single word for fish, l*i, was accompanied by a gesture to indicate the kind of fish).

Their findings provide crucial insights into past human activities and cultural developments.

In some languages, for example, Chinese, there are no morphological processes, and all grammatical information is encoded syntactically by forming strings of single words.

It includes topics from nearly all branches of philosophy.

Some definitions characterize philosophy in relation to its method, like pure reasoning.

However, each language contrasts sounds in different ways.

The compartmentalized concept of religion, where religious and worldly things were separated, was not used before the 1500s.

Men are typically more active in television programming than women and typically hold more power and status.

Mathematics involves the description and manipulation of abstract objects that consist of either abstractions from nature or—in modern mathematics—purely abstract entities that are stipulated to have certain properties, called axioms.

The United States spent $997 billion on its military in 2024, which is by far the largest amount of any country, making up 37% of global military spending and accounting for 3.4% of the country's GDP.

Secondary sexual characteristics that are specific to men include:

Broadened shoulders;
Increased body hair;
An enlarged larynx (also known as an Adam's apple); and
A voice that is significantly deeper than the voice of a child or a woman.

Men often face conscription into military service or are directed into professions with high mortality rates.

Ancient Chinese literature had a heavy emphasis on historiography, with often very detailed court records.

Judaism includes a wide corpus of texts, practices, theological positions, and forms of organization.

Logic is the study of correct reasoning and explores how good arguments can be distinguished from bad ones.

The Commonwealth Fund reported in 2020 that the U.S. had the highest suicide rate among high-income countries.

Normally, expressions and formulas do not appear alone, but are included in sentences of the current language, where expressions play the role of noun phrases and formulas play the role of clauses.

It is generally accepted that the poems were composed at some point around the late eighth or early seventh century BC.

Owing to the way in which language is transmitted between generations and within communities, language perpetually changes, diversifying into new languages or converging due to language contact.

Missionary religions, like Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam, spread rapidly and established themselves as world religions, marking a cultural shift as they gradually replaced other belief systems.

Even by whole-brain criteria, the determination of brain death can be complicated.

G. H. Hardy in A Mathematician's Apology expressed the belief that the aesthetic considerations are, in themselves, sufficient to justify the study of pure mathematics.

The United States has engaged in over 400 military interventions since its founding in 1776, with over half of these occurring between 1950 and 2019 and 25% occurring in the post-Cold War era.

– although many contemporary theorists and literary scholars believe either that "literature" cannot be defined or that it can refer to any use of language.

Meanwhile, trade along the trans-Saharan route intensified.

Mutiny is punishable by death in the United States.

==== Folk religions ====
Chinese folk religion: the indigenous religions of the Han Chinese, or, by metonymy, of all the populations of the Chinese cultural sphere.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2014.

It relies on additional factors such as content and context.

Given the diversity of the field, awards are typically limited in scope, usually on: form, genre, language, nationality and output (e.g.

The U.S. literacy rate is near-universal.

As Americans expanded further into territory inhabited by Native Americans, the federal government implemented policies of Indian removal or assimilation.

The Endangered Species Act of 1973 provides a way to protect threatened and endangered species and their habitats.

Language is therefore dependent on communities of speakers in which children learn language from their elders and peers and themselves transmit language to their own children.

There are many causes, from accidents to diseases.

In functionalist thought, individuals form the structure of society by occupying social roles.

It does this by critically examining their basic concepts, background assumptions, and methods.

They are called fallacies and are divided into formal and informal fallacies based on whether the source of the error lies only in the form of the argument or also in its content and context.

Like them, it is falsifiable, which means in mathematics that, if a result or a theory is wrong, this can be proved by providing a counterexample.

Examples of detritivores include earthworms, woodlice, and millipedes.

These are called writing systems.

Governments use art, or propaganda, to promote their own agendas.

More directly, the word derives from Old English mann.

The composer Richard Wagner recognized the fusion of many disciplines into a single work of opera, exemplified by his cycle Der Ring des Nibelungen ("The Ring of the Nibelung").

Change also happens in the grammar of languages as discourse patterns such as idioms or particular constructions become grammaticalized.

From prehistoric times, Egyptians likely used the power of the annual flooding of the Nile to irrigate their lands, gradually learning to regulate much of it through purposely built irrigation channels and "catch" basins.

Although the United States has reached a post-industrial level of economic development and is often described as having a service economy, it remains a major industrial power; in 2024, the U.S. manufacturing sector was the world's second-largest by value output after China's.

==== Short story ====

A dilemma in defining the "short story" as a literary form is how to, or whether one should, distinguish it from any short narrative and its contested origin, that include the Bible, and Edgar Allan Poe.

=== Ethnicity ===

Human ethnic groups are a social category that identify together as a group based on shared attributes that distinguish them from other groups.

Sociologists and demographers have noted that outside the West, concepts of "religion" or "the secular" are not always rooted in local culture and may not even be present.

Rather, if the whole truth is told, oral tradition stands out as the single most dominant communicative technology of our species as both a historical fact and, in many areas still, a contemporary reality.

Different periods are often defined based on dominant themes that characterize a specific time frame and significant events that initiated these developments or brought them to an end.

the One Standard German Axiom).

In other words, human language is modality-independent, but written or signed language is the way to inscribe or encode the natural human speech or gestures.

It bridges the gap between different disciplines by analyzing which concepts and problems they have in common.

At this time, these concepts seemed totally disconnected from the physical reality, but at the beginning of the 20th century, Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity that uses fundamentally these concepts.

==== Definition of death by heartbeat and breath ====
Historically, attempts to define the exact moment of a human's death have been subjective or imprecise.

=== Popularization ===
Popular mathematics is the act of presenting mathematics without technical terms.

The study of the rules for the internal structure of words are called morphology.

Some of these areas correspond to the older division, as is true regarding number theory (the modern name for higher arithmetic) and geometry.

Often, semantic concepts are embedded in the morphology or syntax of the language in the form of grammatical categories.

=== Drama ===

Drama is literature intended for performance.

In Iwaidja, for example, 'he went out for fish using a torch' is spoken as simply "he-hunted fish torch", but the word for 'torch' is accompanied by a gesture indicating that it was held.

At the same time, empiricist thought associated with the Scientific Revolution questioned the possibility of arriving at universal historical truths.

Some historians strongly support one or the other classification while others characterize history as a hybrid discipline that does not belong to one category at the exclusion of the other.

Within the field of AI ethics, significant yet-unsolved research problems include AI alignment (ensuring that AI behaviors are aligned with their creators' intended goals and interests) and the reduction of algorithmic bias.

LensCulture.com.

Other notable achievements of Greek mathematics are conic sections (Apollonius of Perga, 3rd century BC), trigonometry (Hipparchus of Nicaea, 2nd century BC), and the beginnings of algebra (Diophantus, 3rd century AD).

The Austronesian languages are spoken by 5.5% of the world's population and stretch from Madagascar to maritime Southeast Asia all the way to Oceania.

898–900.

In medicine, new technologies were developed for diagnosis (CT, PET, and MRI scanning), treatment (like the dialysis machine, defibrillator, pacemaker, and a wide array of new pharmaceutical drugs), and research (like interferon cloning and DNA microarrays).

This is sometimes called agreement.

However, several categories are so common as to be nearly universal.

In Europe during the medieval period, history was primarily documented by the clergy in the form of chronicles.

It aims to explore the range of plausible futures and incorporate human values in the development of new technologies.

A similar number of people speak the Afroasiatic languages, which include the populous Semitic languages such as Arabic, Hebrew language, and the languages of the Sahara region, such as the Berber languages and Hausa.

Conscription is overwhelmingly discriminatory, currently only ten countries include women in their conscription programs.

His resignation as commander-in-chief after the Revolutionary War and his later refusal to run for a third term as the country's first president established a precedent for the supremacy of civil authority in the United States and the peaceful transfer of power.

Historiographers examine and codify how historians use sources to construct narratives about the past, including the analysis of the interpretative assumptions from which they proceed.

At the same time, about one million French Canadians migrated from Quebec to New England.

Durable sculptural processes originally used carving (the removal of material) and modelling (the addition of material, such as clay), in stone, metal, ceramic, wood, and other materials, but shifts in sculptural processes have led to almost complete freedom of materials and processes following modernism.

Some historical works limit their scope to small regions, such as a village or a settlement.

=== Social organisation ===
Religions have a societal basis, either as a living tradition which is carried by lay participants, or with an organized clergy, and a definition of what constitutes adherence or membership.

== Literary arts ==

Literature (also known as literary arts or language arts) is generally identified as a collection of writings, which in Western culture are mainly prose (both fiction and non-fiction), drama, and poetry.

Though in practical effect since its drafting in 1777, the Articles of Confederation was ratified in 1781 and formally established a decentralized government that operated until 1789.

The increased international exchange of goods, ideas, and people marked the beginning of globalization.

They attempted to provide rational explanations of the cosmos as a whole.

Many developments in fields like science, technology, economy, living standards, and human population accelerated at unprecedented rates.

In January 2023, the United States had the sixth-highest per capita incarceration rate in the world—531 people per 100,000 inhabitants—and the largest prison and jail population in the world, with more than 1.9 million people incarcerated.

U.S. wealth inequality increased substantially since the late 1980s, and income inequality in the U.S. reached a record high in 2019.

Many languages conventionally employ different genres, styles, and registers in written and spoken language, and in some communities, writing traditionally takes place in an entirely different language than the one spoken.

Fossilization, the natural preservation of the skeletal remains formed over a very long period


=== Legal ===

The death of a person has legal consequences that may vary between jurisdictions.

Historical research often starts with a research question to define the scope of the inquiry.

In the 18th century, social transition led to mathematicians earning their keep through teaching, which led to more careful thinking about the underlying concepts of mathematics.

Another subfield of metaphysics is philosophical cosmology.

It is currently most prominent in the Himalaya regions and extends across all of Asia (cf.

In addition, some language communities use both modes to convey lexical or grammatical meaning, each mode complementing the other.

Tycoons led the nation's expansion in the railroad, petroleum, and steel industries.

According to anthropologists John Monaghan and Peter Just, "Many of the great world religions appear to have begun as revitalization movements of some sort, as the vision of a charismatic prophet fires the imaginations of people seeking a more comprehensive answer to their problems than they feel is provided by everyday beliefs.

Autopsies can be further classified into cases where external examination suffices, and those where the body is dissected and an internal examination is conducted.

It focused on recorded history since the invention of writing, leaving prehistory to other fields, such as archaeology.

A stone pottery wheel found in the city-state of Ur dates to around 3,429 BCE, and even older fragments of wheel-thrown pottery have been found in the same area.

The oldest artifacts with drawings depicting wheeled carts date from about 3,500 BCE.

As a human activity, the practice of mathematics has a social side, which includes education, careers, recognition, popularization, and so on.

The inception of the term in the 1960s referred to a strict and focused practice of idea-based art that defied traditional visual criteria associated with the visual arts in its presentation as text.

In contrast, postmodernists reject grand narratives that claim to offer a single, objective truth.

Routledge.

The Academy Awards, popularly known as "the Oscars", have been held annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences since 1929, and the Golden Globe Awards have been held annually since January 1944.

By contrast, the sociologist Max Weber for example defines human action as "social" if, by virtue of the subjective meanings attached to the action by individuals, it "takes account of the behavior of others, and is thereby oriented in its course".

In general, religiō referred to broad social obligations towards anything including family, neighbors, rulers, and even towards God.

The family forms the main social unit, with most members being related by birth or marriage.

[However, evidence that thought and language are separate systems is found, for example, by] looking at deficits in different abilities – for instance, in people with brain damage... who have impairments in language – some form of aphasia [ – yet are clearly able to think]."

Epistemological problems in relation to the law include what counts as evidence and how much evidence is required to find a person guilty of a crime.

Another influential development was the spread of European historiographical methods, which became the dominant approach to the academic study of the past worldwide.

The distinction between Technik and Technologie is absent in English, and so both were translated as technology.

The oldest known mathematics textbook is the Rhind papyrus, dated from c. 1650 BCE in Egypt.

There are 444 game publishers, developers, and hardware companies in California alone.

Such trade networks did not exist for the now-extinct Neanderthals.

According to one view, philosophy is conceptual analysis, which involves finding the necessary and sufficient conditions for the application of concepts.

British colonization of the East Coast began with the Virginia Colony (1607) and the Plymouth Colony (Massachusetts, 1620).

A member of numerous international organizations, the U.S. plays a major role in global political, cultural, economic, and military affairs.

=== Reconstruction, Gilded Age, and Progressive Era (1866–1917) ===

Efforts toward reconstruction in the secessionist South had begun as early as 1862, but it was only after President Lincoln's assassination that the three Reconstruction Amendments to the Constitution were ratified to protect civil rights.

This change has resulted in several mistranslations: For example, Saint Augustine's warning that Christians should beware of mathematici, meaning "astrologers", is sometimes mistranslated as a condemnation of mathematicians.

Theoretically, the extension of the maximum lifespan can be achieved by reducing the rate of aging damage, by periodic replacement of damaged tissues, molecular repair, or rejuvenation of deteriorated cells and tissues.

More specifically, death occurs when a living entity experiences irreversible cessation of all functioning.

The United States is the only developed country without a system of universal healthcare, and a significant proportion of the population that does not carry health insurance.

=== Pure and applied mathematics ===

Until the 19th century, the development of mathematics in the West was mainly motivated by the needs of technology and science, and there was no clear distinction between pure and applied mathematics.

As medical technologies advance, ideas about when death occurs may have to be reevaluated in light of the ability to restore a person to vitality after longer periods of apparent death (as happened when CPR and defibrillation showed that cessation of heartbeat is inadequate as a decisive indicator of death).

Most of the world's major record companies are based in the U.S.; they are represented by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).

While there are no universally accepted techniques for this synthesis, historians rely on various interpretative tools and approaches in this process.

However, many languages also have grammatical conventions that signal the social position of the speaker in relation to others through the use of registers that are related to social hierarchies or divisions.

=== Children's literature ===

A separate genre of children's literature only began to emerge in the eighteenth century, with the development of the concept of childhood.

At the Second Continental Congress, the colonies appointed George Washington commander-in-chief of the Continental Army, and created a committee that named Thomas Jefferson to draft the Declaration of Independence.

Lyric poetry (as opposed to epic poetry) was often the speciality of courts and aristocratic circles, particularly in East Asia where songs were collected by the Chinese aristocracy as poems, the most notable being the Shijing or Book of Songs (1046–c.

An argument is deductively valid if the truth of its premises ensures the truth of its conclusion.

History can also foster social cohesion by providing people with a collective identity through a shared past, helping to preserve and cultivate cultural heritage and values across generations.

Other thematic branches include constitutional history, legal history, urban history, business history, history of technology, medical history, history of education, and people's history.

Some parts of death in culture are legally based, having laws for when death occurs, such as the receiving of a death certificate, the settlement of the deceased estate, and the issues of inheritance and, in some countries, inheritance taxation.

ISBN 0-425-18144-8.

In this sense, philosophy is sometimes described as "the midwife of the sciences".

It was first used to denote sex by Carl Linnaeus in 1751.

The very best in literature is annually recognized by the Nobel Prize in Literature, which is awarded to an author from any country who has, in the words of the will of Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel, produced "in the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction" (original Swedish: den som inom litteraturen har producerat det mest framstående verket i en idealisk riktning).

Alternative suggestions are that mental entities (such as souls and experiences) and abstract entities (such as numbers) exist apart from physical things.

Various historians covered unconventional perspectives, focusing on the experiences of marginalized groups through approaches such as history from below, microhistory, oral history, and feminist history.

In modern usage, architecture is the art and discipline of creating or inferring an implied or apparent plan for a complex object or system.

== Conceptions ==


=== In biology ===

Humans, along with their closest relatives bonobos and chimpanzees, are highly social animals.

States are subdivided into counties or county equivalents, and (except for Hawaii) further divided into municipalities, each administered by elected representatives.

Religion is the substance, the ground, and the depth of man's spiritual life."

Comics are often called the "ninth art" (le neuvième art) in Francophone scholarship, adding to the traditional "Seven Arts".

The Annales school highlights long-term social and economic trends while relying on quantitative and interdisciplinary methods.

People with a lesion in this area of the brain develop receptive aphasia, a condition in which there is a major impairment of language comprehension, while speech retains a natural-sounding rhythm and a relatively normal sentence structure.

=== Education ===

American primary and secondary education, known in the U.S. as K–12 ("kindergarten through 12th grade"), is decentralized.

For example, the Danish language that most scholars consider a single language with several dialects is classified as two distinct languages (Danish and Jutish) by the Ethnologue.

Historical reasoning is sometimes used in philosophy and other disciplines as a method to explain phenomena.

Mahayana Buddhism (or the Great Vehicle) under which are a multitude of doctrines that became prominent in China and are still relevant in Vietnam, Korea, Japan and to a lesser extent in Europe and the United States.

==== United Kingdom ====
Literary works have been protected by copyright law from unauthorized reproduction since at least 1710.

In this sense, philosophy is sometimes understood as a proper science in its own right.

One way to make these assessments is to evaluate whether the author was able, in principle, to provide a faithful presentation of the studied event.

Drawing, gesture (as in action painting), composition, narration (as in narrative art), or abstraction (as in abstract art), among other aesthetic modes, may serve to manifest the expressive and conceptual intention of the practitioner.

This means that the sentence "what's your name" is ¿como te llamas?

== See also ==


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== Sources ===


== Further reading ==


== External links ==
Dolwick, JS.

Technology became increasingly influenced by science, beginning a cycle of mutual advancement.

Much of Chinese literature originates with the Hundred Schools of Thought period that occurred during the Eastern Zhou dynasty (769‒269 BC).

Language.

Other continuity-based models see language as having developed from music, a view already espoused by Rousseau, Herder, Humboldt, and Charles Darwin.

Communication technologies apply branches of mathematics that may be very old (e.g., arithmetic), especially with respect to transmission security, in cryptography and coding theory.

Vowels are called close when the lips are relatively closed, as in the pronunciation of the vowel [i] (English "ee"), or open when the lips are relatively open, as in the vowel [a] (English "ah").

Though a Public Registry Law guarantees all Brazilian citizens the right to register deaths, regardless of their financial means of their family members (often children), the Brazilian government has not taken away the burden, the hidden costs, and fees of filing for a death.

These applications may be completely outside their initial area of mathematics, and may concern physical phenomena that were completely unknown when the mathematical theory was introduced.

The 1904 Summer Olympics in St. Louis, Missouri, were the first-ever Olympic Games held outside of Europe.

For some scholars, including Whig historians and the Marxist scholar E. H. Carr, history is a key to understanding the present and, in Carr's case, shaping the future.

Early European colonies also included the thriving Dutch colony of New Nederland (settled 1626, present-day New York) and the small Swedish colony of New Sweden (settled 1638 in what became Delaware).

Along with pastoral societies, horticultural societies emerged about 10,000 years ago, after technological changes of the Agricultural Revolution made it possible to cultivate crops and raise animals.

In such a case, they will often construct a communication form that has traits of both languages, and that has a simplified grammatical and phonological structure.

Silences can happen when contemporaries find information too obvious to document but may also occur if there are specific reasons to withhold or destroy information.

Major figures of techno-utopianism include Ray Kurzweil and Nick Bostrom.

The largest Jewish religious movements are Orthodox Judaism (Haredi Judaism and Modern Orthodox Judaism), Conservative Judaism and Reform Judaism.

The movement gained wider popularity in the early 21st century.

Additionally, pied babblers have demonstrated the ability to generate two functionally distinct vocalisations composed of the same sound type, which can only be distinguished by the number of repeated elements.

In the 18th and 19th centuries, the word history became more closely associated with factual accounts and evidence-based inquiry, coinciding with the professionalization of historical inquiry, a meaning still dominant in contemporary usage.

From prehistoric cave paintings during the Upper Palaeolithic, to ancient and contemporary forms of rituals, to modern-day films, the arts have registered, embodied, and preserved the ever-shifting relationships of humans with each other and the world.

A similar debate exists for the Chinese script, which developed around 1200 BC.

These languages together account for 94% of the world's population, whereas 94% of the world's languages account for the remaining 6% of the global population.

It can be seen as returning to older, more inclusive notions, so that cultural studies, for instance, include, in addition to canonical works, popular and minority genres.

The earliest of these books were educational books, books on conduct, and simple ABCs—often decorated with animals, plants, and anthropomorphic letters.

It was distinct from Europe's tradition of high art, which was less accessible and generally less relevant to early American settlers.

Drama and satire also developed as urban cultures, which provided a larger public audience, and later readership for literary production.

The earliest known technology is the stone tool, used during prehistory, followed by the control of fire—which in turn contributed to the growth of the human brain and the development of language during the Ice Age, according to the cooking hypothesis.

However, 1% of births in the United States end in a stillbirth.

Many traditional songs have been sung within the same family or folk group for generations, and sometimes trace back to such origins as the British Isles, mainland Europe, or Africa.

Mathematicians can find an aesthetic value to mathematics.

Languages differ widely in whether they are encoded through the use of categories or lexical units.

However, a notable exception occurred with the tradition of pure mathematics in Ancient Greece.

Other languages spoken at home by one million people or more include Chinese (3.40 million), Tagalog (1.71 million), Vietnamese (1.52 million), Arabic (1.39 million), French (1.18 million), Korean (1.07 million), and Russian (1.04 million).

Gender roles have varied historically, and challenges to predominant gender norms have recurred in many societies.

=== Evolution of aging and mortality ===

Inquiry into the evolution of aging aims to explain why so many living things and the vast majority of animals weaken and die with age.

Critics, on the other hand, believe that the rule does not uphold the best interests of the donors and that the rule does not effectively promote organ donation.

A knowledge society generates, shares, and makes available to all members of the society knowledge that may be used to improve the human condition.

The SRY gene is typically found on the Y chromosome and causes the development of the testes, which in turn govern other aspects of male sex differentiation.

As more states were admitted, a North–South division over slavery led the Confederate States of America to attempt secession and fight the Union in the 1861–1865 American Civil War.

It is the fifth-largest organized religion in the world, with approximately 30 million Sikhs.

The study of books and other texts as artifacts or traditions is instead encompassed by textual criticism or the history of the book.

NASA's Apollo program (1961–1972) achieved the first crewed Moon landing with the 1969 Apollo 11 mission; it remains one of the agency's most significant milestones.

Sex differentiation in males proceeds in a testes-dependent way while female differentiation is not gonad dependent.

Like in China, historical writing was closely related to the imperial household, but Japanese historians placed less importance on critical source evaluation than their Chinese counterparts.

The United States receives more high-impact extreme weather incidents than any other country.

How these branches are related to one another is also a question in the philosophy of science.

During the 19th century, mathematicians began to use variables to represent things other than numbers (such as matrices, modular integers, and geometric transformations), on which generalizations of arithmetic operations are often valid.

Some religions place an emphasis on belief, while others emphasize practice.

Throughout most of recorded history, states or state-like structures have been central to this field of study.

Formal logic uses artificial languages with a precise symbolic representation to investigate arguments.

=== Awards and prize problems ===

The most prestigious award in mathematics is the Fields Medal, established by Canadian John Charles Fields in 1936 and awarded every four years (except around World War II) to up to four individuals.

Lingering issues with Britain remained, leading to the War of 1812, which was fought to a draw.

The U.S. cable television system offers hundreds of channels catering to a variety of niches.

He asserts that "violence is neither essential to nor exclusive to religion" and that "virtually every form of religious violence has its nonreligious corollary."

It is one of the plastic arts.

It implies a slow shift from one spiritual state to another.

the place in the vocal tract where the airflow is obstructed, commonly at the lips, teeth, alveolar ridge, palate, velum, uvula, or glottis.

Copyright in the Union is furthermore dependent on international conventions to which the European Union is a member (such as the TRIPS Agreement and conventions to which all Member States are parties (such as the Berne Convention)).

A follow-up poll in 2015 found that 63% of the globe identified as religious, 22% as not religious, and 11% as convinced atheists.

It is the wealthiest country, with the highest disposable household income per capita among OECD members, though its wealth inequality is highly pronounced.

Recent years have brought about a rise in social media's cultural prominence, with potential repercussions on democracy, and economic and social life.

Though scholars agree that music generally consists of a few core elements, their exact definitions are debated.

Some focus on specific time periods, such as ancient history, while others concentrate on particular geographic regions, such as the history of Africa.

All languages, for instance, make a basic distinction between a group of words that prototypically denotes things and concepts and a group of words that prototypically denotes actions and events.

Nowadays these religions are practiced only by minorities.

In this way, issues of identity and politics can have profound effects on language structure.

There is also a third type of familial relationship applied to godparents or adoptive children (fictive).

"; and, "Are the great variety of world religions in some way compatible in spite of their apparently contradictory theological claims?"

During the early modern period, mathematics began to develop at an accelerating pace in Western Europe, with innovations that revolutionized mathematics, such as the introduction of variables and symbolic notation by François Viète (1540–1603), the introduction of logarithms by John Napier in 1614, which greatly simplified numerical calculations, especially for astronomy and marine navigation, the introduction of coordinates by René Descartes (1596–1650) for reducing geometry to algebra, and the development of calculus by Isaac Newton (1643–1727) and Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716).

In most languages, it is possible to construct complex words that are built of several morphemes.

332, no.

The Mathematics Subject Classification has a section for "general applied mathematics" but does not mention "pure mathematics".

Sperm that pass from the vagina to the uterus can enter the fallopian tubes and fertilize an egg, which develops into an embryo.

The most important of these include the Classics of Confucianism, of Daoism, of Mohism, of Legalism, as well as works of military science (e.g.

=== Architecture ===

Architecture is the art and science of designing buildings and structures.

For instance, natural philosophy was a major branch of philosophy.

Prominent careers for professional mathematicians include mathematics teacher or professor, statistician, actuary, financial analyst, economist, accountant, commodity trader, or computer consultant.

For example, discrete geometry includes counting configurations of geometric shapes.

Later, Goldstone proposed the concept of production or income of adaptation energy which may be stored (up to a limit) as a capital reserve of adaptation.

=== Health ===

While a majority of the global health gender disparities is weighted against women, there are situations in which men tend to fare poorer.

3 (March 2025), pp.

Influential traditions in the history of philosophy include Western, Arabic–Persian, Indian, and Chinese philosophy.

Speakers of the Niger-Congo languages account for 6.9% of the world's population.

Modern linguistics is a science that concerns itself with all aspects of language, examining it from all of the theoretical viewpoints described above.

Major artistic movements such as the abstract expressionism of Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning and the pop art of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein developed largely in the United States.

This "diving response," in which metabolic activity and oxygen requirements are minimal, is something humans share with cetaceans called the mammalian diving reflex.

Children acquire the language or languages used around them: whichever languages they receive sufficient exposure to during childhood.

This was accelerated by the Homestead Acts, through which nearly 10 percent of the total land area of the United States was given away free to some 1.6 million homesteaders.

Ancient polytheistic religions, such as those of Greece, Rome, and Scandinavia, are usually categorized under the heading of mythology.

==== Biology and chemistry ====

Biology uses probability extensively in fields such as ecology or neurobiology.

Estimates of the number of human languages in the world vary between 5,000 and 7,000.

Major branches of philosophy are epistemology, ethics, logic, and metaphysics.

A substudy of gerontology known as biogerontology seeks to eliminate death by natural aging in humans, often through the application of natural processes found in certain organisms.

These societies have a similar level of technology and complexity to pastoral societies.

== Religious views ==


=== Buddhism ===

In Buddhist doctrine and practice, death plays an important role.

Techno-utopianism has attracted both praise and criticism from progressive, religious, and conservative thinkers.

It addresses the questions of when and where the source was created and seeks to identify the author, understand their reasons for producing the source, and determine if it has undergone some type of modification since its creation.

They include narrative presentations of historical developments, questions to engage students and prompt critical thinking, and discussions on historical topics.

The U.S. ranks as the second-highest emitter of greenhouse gases behind China.

Starting in 1998, life expectancy in the U.S. fell behind that of other wealthy industrialized countries, and Americans' "health disadvantage" gap has been increasing ever since.

=== Semantics ===

Languages express meaning by relating a sign form to a meaning, or its content.

The District of Columbia, with no representatives or senators, is allocated three electoral votes.

Dance disciplines in sports include gymnastics, figure skating, and synchronized swimming.

These subdivisions are hunting and gathering, pastoral, horticultural, and agrarian.

The division of language into separate but connected systems of sign and meaning goes back to the first linguistic studies of de Saussure and is now used in almost all branches of linguistics.

The United States Fish and Wildlife Service implements and enforces the Act.

Phenomenologists, such as Edmund Husserl, characterize philosophy as a "rigorous science" investigating essences.

Like beauty, it is hard to define, it is commonly related to elegance, which involves qualities like simplicity, symmetry, completeness, and generality.

Jains are found mostly in India.

The term was previously uncommon in English and mostly referred to the academic discipline, as in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

It includes pro-feminist groups such as the men's liberation movement, and anti-feminist groups such as the manosphere.

In most European countries, however, religion has a much smaller influence on politics although it used to be much more important.

It assumes that declarative knowledge is a combination of different parts and attempts to identify what those parts are.

And Other Stories.

Syntactical rules determine how word order and sentence structure is constrained, and how those constraints contribute to meaning.

Literature is a method of recording, preserving, and transmitting knowledge and entertainment.

== External links ==
 The dictionary definition of man at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Man at Wikiquote
 Media related to Man at Wikimedia Commons

Mathematics is a field of study that discovers and organizes methods, theories, and theorems that are developed and proved for the needs of empirical sciences and mathematics itself.

This tradition was associated with Confucian philosophy and closely tied to the government in the form of the ruling dynasty, each responsible for writing the official history of its predecessor.

Early scholarship on technology was split between two arguments: technological determinism, and social construction.

In English, the verb "sing" has the inflectional forms "singing" and "sung", which are both verbs, and the derivational form "singer", which is a noun derived from the verb with the agentive suffix "-er".

A 2022 study found that 76% of U.S. commuters drive alone and 14% ride a bicycle, including bike owners and users of bike-sharing networks.

It also has the highest number of nuclear power reactors of any country.

For instance, the English word "unexpected" can be analyzed as being composed of the three morphemes "un-", "expect" and "-ed".

== See also ==

Index of literature articles


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Bibliography ===


== Further reading ==


== External links ==

Project Gutenberg Online Library
Internet Book List similar to IMDb but for books (archived 7 February 2007)
Digital eBook Collection – Internet Archive

The United States of America (USA), also known as the United States (U.S.) or America, is a country primarily located in North America.

Publishers and literary award societies typically consider a novella to be between 17,000 and 40,000 words.

According to the Game Developers Conference (GDC), the U.S. is the top location for video game development, with 58% of the world's game developers based there in 2025.

The most-watched individual sports in the U.S. are golf and auto racing, particularly NASCAR and IndyCar.

One area in epistemology is the analysis of knowledge.

The word is sometimes used to refer to codes, ciphers, and other kinds of artificially constructed communication systems such as formally defined computer languages used for computer programming.

Alternative views state that knowledge requires additional components, like the absence of luck; different components, like the manifestation of cognitive virtues instead of justification; or they deny that knowledge can be analyzed in terms of other phenomena.

By sacred things he meant things "set apart and forbidden—beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them."

1911. pp.

The overwhelming majority of Americans believe in a higher power or spiritual force, engage in spiritual practices such as prayer, and consider themselves religious or spiritual.

Some theorists understand it as the study of everyday life outside the domains of politics and economics, including cultural practices, family structures, community interactions, and education.

Other subfields are aesthetics, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, philosophy of religion, philosophy of science, philosophy of mathematics, philosophy of history, and political philosophy.

Many easily stated number problems have solutions that require sophisticated methods, often from across mathematics.

Human society features high degrees of cooperation, and differs in important ways from groups of chimps and bonobos, including the parental role of males, the use of language to communicate, the specialization of labor, and the tendency to build "nests" (multigenerational camps, town, or cities).

Workers, who have common interests, may organize into labor unions to advance those interests.

=== Trade and economics ===

Trade, the voluntary exchange of goods and services, has long been an aspect of human societies, and it is seen as a characteristic that differentiates humans from other animals.

UFO Religions in which extraterrestrial entities are an element of belief, such as Raëlism, Aetherius Society, and Marshall Vian Summers's New Message from God.

Since Standard Spanish uses final /s/ in the morpheme marking the second person subject "you" in verbs, the Caribbean varieties now have to express the second person using the pronoun tú.

Depending on the region and theme, the time frames covered by these periods can vary and historians may use entirely different periodizations.

American fast-food restaurant chains, such as McDonald's, Burger King, Chick-fil-A, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Dunkin' Donuts and many others, have numerous outlets around the world.

16.)

These technological advances led to significant developments in medicine, chemistry, physics, and engineering.

=== Epistemology ===

Epistemology is the branch of philosophy that studies knowledge.

=== Demographic classification ===

The five largest religious groups by world population, estimated to account for 5.8 billion people and 84% of the population, are Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism (with the relative numbers for Buddhism and Hinduism dependent on the extent of syncretism), and traditional folk religions.

== Philosophy ==

Philosophy of technology is a branch of philosophy that studies the "practice of designing and creating artifacts", and the "nature of the things so created."

All ancient Greek literature was to some degree oral in nature, and the earliest literature was completely so.

Tool use was once considered a defining characteristic of the genus Homo.

Hawaii, the southern tip of Florida and U.S. territories in the Caribbean and Pacific are tropical.

Not all meanings in a language are represented by single words.

German, spoken by 1 million people at home in 2010, fell to 857,000 total speakers in 2020.

The privacy of cryptocurrency has been debated.

This problem is avoided by seeing philosophy as an immature or provisional science whose subdisciplines cease to be philosophy once they have fully developed.

The aptitude of cells for gradual deterioration and mortality means that cells are naturally sentenced to stable and long-term loss of living capacities, even despite continuing metabolic reactions and viability.

Sun Tzu's The Art of War, c. 5th century BC) and Chinese history (e.g.

In 2016, the top fifth of earners took home more than half of all income, giving the U.S. one of the widest income distributions among OECD countries.

From roughly the age of three to five years, a child's ability to speak or sign is refined to the point that it resembles adult language.

The grammatical rules for how to produce new sentences from words that are already known is called syntax.

Riemannian geometry, the study of distance properties in curved spaces.

In virtue of its relation to ideology and national identity, history is closely connected to politics and historical theories can directly impact political decisions.

The independence of mathematical truth from any experimentation implies that the accuracy of such predictions depends only on the adequacy of the model.

Different schools of thought often come with their own methodological implications for how to write history.

In the 20th century, as a result of scientific progress and the Second Industrial Revolution, technology stopped being considered a distinct academic discipline and took on the meaning: the systemic use of knowledge to practical ends.

By 1900, the country had established itself as a great power, a status solidified after its involvement in World War I.

In 2020, 90% of the world's men were literate, compared to 87% of women.

For example, it is not sufficient to verify by measurement that, say, two lengths are equal; their equality must be proven via reasoning from previously accepted results (theorems) and a few basic statements.

Its scope broadened in the 20th century as historians became interested in the human past before the invention of writing.

Historians strive to integrate the perspectives of several sources to develop a coherent narrative.

To the right is a graphic representation of the syntactic analysis of the English sentence "the cat sat on the mat".

), Robert W. Connell (ed.

These problems and debates led to a wide expansion of mathematical logic, with subareas such as model theory (modeling some logical theories inside other theories), proof theory, type theory, computability theory and computational complexity theory.

The British attempt to then disarm the colonists resulted in the 1775 Battles of Lexington and Concord, igniting the American Revolutionary War.

Some approaches argue that there is a set of essential features shared by all parts of philosophy.

Marx framed it as a tool used by capitalists to oppress the proletariat, but believed that technology would be a fundamentally liberating force once it was "freed from societal deformations".

The method of reflective equilibrium also employs intuitions.

This view emphasizes that the disinterested pursuit of truth is an end in itself, while external purposes, associated with ideology or politics, threaten to undermine the accuracy of historical research by distorting the past.

The syntactical rules of a language determine why a sentence in English such as "I love you" is meaningful, but "*love you I" is not.

=== Transportation ===

The United States' 4 million miles (6.4 million kilometers) of road network, owned almost entirely by state and local governments, is the longest in the world.

It is demonstrated that oscillations of well-being appear when the reserve of adaptability is almost exhausted.

In particular, spacetime of special relativity is a non-Euclidean space of dimension four, and spacetime of general relativity is a (curved) manifold of dimension four.

Federal prisons are run by the Federal Bureau of Prisons and hold pretrial detainees as well as people who have been convicted of federal crimes.

According to one such view, philosophy is mainly undertaken for its own sake and does not make significant contributions to existing practices or external goals.

Because innovation is often undertaken at the edge of scientific knowledge, most technologies are not derived from scientific knowledge, but instead from engineering, tinkering and chance.

Applied ethics studies the consequences of the general theories developed by normative ethics in specific situations, for example, in the workplace or for medical treatments.

In Imperial China during the Tang dynasty (618–907 CE), a mathematics curriculum was adopted for the civil service exam to join the state bureaucracy.

One of the deadliest incidents of all time is the 1975 Banqiao Dam Failure, with varying estimates, up to 240,000 dead.

=== Ancient ===

In addition to recognizing how to count physical objects, prehistoric peoples may have also known how to count abstract quantities, like time—days, seasons, or years.

=== Foreign relations ===

The United States has an established structure of foreign relations, with the world's second-largest diplomatic corps as of 2024.

The Senate has 100 members—two residents from each state and elected by that state's voters for a six-year term.

Several discretionary non-competitive awards are given as well, including a Special Tony Award, the Tony Honors for Excellence in Theatre, and the Isabelle Stevenson Award.

=== Statistics and other decision sciences ===

The field of statistics is a mathematical application that is employed for the collection and processing of data samples, using procedures based on mathematical methods such as, and especially, probability theory.

How the medical profession categorized causes of death.

The Volvox algae are among the simplest organisms to exhibit that division of labor between two completely different cell types, and as a consequence, include the death of somatic line as a regular, genetically regulated part of its life history.

Vowels are those sounds that have no audible friction caused by the narrowing or obstruction of some part of the upper vocal tract.

The language comes to contain mostly the grammatical and phonological categories that exist in both languages.

== Social contexts of use and transmission ==

While humans have the ability to learn any language, they only do so if they grow up in an environment in which language exists and is used by others.

Humans use language as a way of signalling identity with one cultural group as well as difference from others.

Furthermore, events causally linked to death in the past no longer kill in all circumstances; without a functioning heart or lungs, life can sometimes be sustained with a combination of life support devices, organ transplants, and artificial pacemakers.

The largest trading partners of the United States are the European Union, Mexico, Canada, China, Japan, South Korea, the United Kingdom, Vietnam, India, and Taiwan.

==== Security ====
With the growing reliance of technology, there have been security and privacy concerns along with it.

A new list of seven important problems, titled the "Millennium Prize Problems", was published in 2000.

At the start of the 20th century, there was a development to express historical movements in formulas.

== Areas of study ==
History is a wide field of inquiry encompassing many branches.

Historical writing evolved throughout the ages and became increasingly professional, particularly during the 19th century, when a rigorous methodology and various academic institutions were established.

Death is generally applied to whole organisms; the equivalent for individual components of an organism—such as cells or tissues—is necrosis.

Allison Parshall, "Pain Language: The sound of 'ow' transcends borders", Scientific American, vol.

== Criticism ==

Art criticism is the discussion or evaluation of art.

While some stories were told for amusement and leisure, most functioned as practical lessons from tribal experience applied to immediate moral, social, psychological, and environmental issues.

==== Secularism ====

Secularization is the transformation of the politics of a society from close identification with a particular religion's values and institutions toward nonreligious values and secular institutions.

A minority of linguists have argued that language loss is a natural process that should not be counteracted and that documenting endangered languages for posterity is sufficient.

Many of the world's top universities, as listed by various ranking organizations, are in the United States, including 19 of the top 25.

==== Knowledge ====

As the access to electronic information resources increased at the beginning of the 21st century, special attention was extended from the information society to the knowledge society.

hdl:10125/4606.

It often requires problem-solving under strict constraints.

During school, mathematical capabilities and positive expectations have a strong association with career interest in the field.

According to Mikhail B. Sevryuk, in the January 2006 issue of the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, "The number of papers and books included in the Mathematical Reviews (MR) database since 1940 (the first year of operation of MR) is now more than 1.9 million, and more than 75 thousand items are added to the database each year.

=== Arabic–Persian ===

Arabic–Persian philosophy arose in the early 9th century CE as a response to discussions in the Islamic theological tradition.

The 20th century has been especially fruitful in use of interfaith dialogue as a means of solving ethnic, political, or even religious conflict, with Christian–Jewish reconciliation representing a complete reverse in the attitudes of many Christian communities towards Jews.

Several species of animals have proved to be able to acquire forms of communication through social learning: for instance a bonobo named Kanzi learned to express itself using a set of symbolic lexigrams.

However, there have been many attempts in the modern pluralistic situation to distinguish culture from religion.

They are sometimes classified as the dharmic religions, as they all feature dharma, the specific law of reality and duties expected according to the religion.

=== Purpose ===
Various suggestions about the purpose or value of history have been made.

Nearly all drama took verse form until comparatively recently.

In turn, the axiomatic method allows for the study of various geometries obtained either by changing the axioms or by considering properties that do not change under specific transformations of the space.

In the case of sleep, electroencephalograms (EEGs) are used to tell the difference.

He also identified other criteria such as significance, unexpectedness, and inevitability, which contribute to mathematical aesthetics.

Four religions—Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism—account for over 77% of the world's population, and 92% of the world either follows one of those four religions or identifies as nonreligious, meaning that the vast majority of remaining religions account for only 8% of the population combined.

In order to represent the sounds of the world's languages in writing, linguists have developed the International Phonetic Alphabet, designed to represent all of the discrete sounds that are known to contribute to meaning in human languages.

Informal logic uses non-formal criteria and standards to assess the correctness of arguments.

Most mathematical curricula remained at a basic and practical level until the nineteenth century, when it began to flourish in France and Germany.

Similar debates surround the purpose of history—for example, whether its main aim is theoretical, to uncover the truth, or practical, to learn lessons from the past.

In the 15th century, its meaning shifted to cover the branch of knowledge studying the past in addition to narratives about the past.

As farming populations gathered in larger and denser communities, interactions between different groups increased, leading to the further development of governance within and between communities.

It examines the basic concepts, assumptions, and arguments in the field of politics.

== Impact ==

Technological change is the largest cause of long-term economic growth.

Acoustically, these different segments are characterized by different formant structures, that are visible in a spectrogram of the recorded sound wave.

Adult humans exhibit sexual dimorphism in many other characteristics, many of which have no direct link to reproductive ability.

This development is sometimes thought to have coincided with an increase in brain volume, and many linguists see the structures of language as having evolved to serve specific communicative and social functions.

In Zalta, Edward N.

Brain death is sometimes used as a legal definition of death.

This notation consists of symbols used for representing operations, unspecified numbers, relations and any other mathematical objects, and then assembling them into expressions and formulas.

In certain cultures, death is more of a process than a single event.

The original consonant *bʰ became /b/ in the Germanic languages, the previous *b in turn became /p/, and the previous *p became /f/.

Hispanic and Latino Americans form the second-largest group and are 18.7% of the United States population.

The process is similar to the process of evolution, where the process of descent with modification leads to the formation of a phylogenetic tree.

Historically, the concept of a proof and its associated mathematical rigour first appeared in Greek mathematics, most notably in Euclid's Elements.

==== Agrarian ====

Agrarian societies use agricultural technological advances to cultivate crops over a large area.

Eventually, the working of metals led to the discovery of alloys such as bronze and brass (about 4,000 BCE).

Metaphysicians attempt to answer basic questions including "Why is there something rather than nothing?

Further questions addressed by the philosophy of religion are: "How are we to interpret religious language, if not literally?

At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis in mathematics and the resulting systematization of the axiomatic method led to an explosion of new areas of mathematics.

"3 human-classifier of student" – three students
For trees, it would be:

san-bon no ki (三本の木) lit.

The Renaissance period started in the 14th century and saw a renewed interest in schools of ancient philosophy, in particular Platonism.

One is also given for regional theater.

Oral literature is an ancient human tradition found in "all corners of the world."

Other European languages do not distinguish between romance and novel: "a novel is le roman, der Roman, il romanzo", indicates the proximity of the forms.

In Greek mythology, the opening of Pandora's box releases death upon the world.

The beginning of Roman literature dates to 240 BC, when a Roman audience saw a Latin version of a Greek play.

As a result, the philosophical view that mathematical objects somehow exist on their own in abstraction is often referred to as Platonism.

According to another perspective, causal relations between historic events are unique and shaped by contingent factors.

Phylogenetic analysis predicts 2% of human deaths to be caused by homicide, which approximately matches the rate of homicide in band societies.

In the United Kingdom, for example, nine out of ten of all the deaths that occur daily relates to senescence, while around the world, it accounts for two-thirds of 150,000 deaths that take place daily.

Linguists recognize many hundreds of language families, although some of them can possibly be grouped into larger units as more evidence becomes available and in-depth studies are carried out.

According to Ludwig Wittgenstein, for instance, philosophy aims at dispelling misunderstandings to which humans are susceptible due to the confusing structure of ordinary language.

Studies published in 2013 have indicated that unborn fetuses are capable of language acquisition to some degree.

The political values of the American Revolution evolved from an armed rebellion demanding reform within an empire to a revolution that created a new social and governing system founded on the defense of liberty and the protection of inalienable natural rights;  sovereignty of the people; republicanism over monarchy, aristocracy, and other hereditary political power; civic virtue; and an intolerance of political corruption.

Roughly speaking, each mathematical object is defined by the set of all similar objects and the properties that these objects must have.

how sounds build words and words build phrases; the discreteness of the elements of language, meaning that the elements out of which linguistic signs are constructed are discrete units, e.g.

Colleges and universities directly funded by the federal government do not charge tuition and are limited to military personnel and government employees, including: the U.S. service academies, the Naval Postgraduate School, and military staff colleges.

Another complex tradition of historical writing emerged in ancient China, with early precursors starting in the late 2nd millennium BCE.

They can also be defined as implicit equations, often polynomial equations (which spawned algebraic geometry).

=== Visual arts ===

Folk art in colonial America grew out of artisanal craftsmanship in communities that allowed commonly trained people to individually express themselves.

The Kyoto School emerged in the 20th century and integrated Eastern spirituality with Western philosophy in its exploration of concepts like absolute nothingness (zettai-mu), place (basho), and the self.

Virtue theorists judge actions based on how the moral character of the agent is expressed.

He argued that narrowing the definition to mean the belief in a supreme deity or judgment after death or idolatry and so on, would exclude many peoples from the category of religious, and thus "has the fault of identifying religion rather with particular developments than with the deeper motive which underlies them."

For example, 50% of young foxes die to birds, bobcats, coyotes, and other foxes as well.

Following the Emancipation Proclamation on January 1, 1863, many freed slaves joined the Union army.

The term "United States" and its initialism "U.S.", used as nouns or as adjectives in English, are common short names for the country.

In the modern U.S., wine production is undertaken in all fifty states, with California producing 84 percent of all U.S. wine.

Threskeia was sparsely used in classical Greece but became more frequently used in the writings of Josephus in the 1st century CE.

Through sustained language contact over long periods, linguistic traits diffuse between languages, and languages belonging to different families may converge to become more similar.

Since the 1970s, technology's impact on the environment has been criticized, leading to a surge in investment in solar, wind, and other forms of clean energy.

The United States restaurant industry was projected at $899 billion in sales for 2020, and employed more than 15 million people, representing 10% of the nation's workforce directly.

To varying degrees people inherently fear death, both the process and the eventuality; it is hard wired and part of the 'survival instinct' of all animals.

History has been primarily concerned with written documents.

Billions of people use different online payment methods, such as WeChat Pay, PayPal, Alipay, and much more to help transfer money.

Finally, many mathematical terms are common words that are used with a completely different meaning.

It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and home to the United Nations headquarters.

Presently, "calculus" refers mainly to the elementary part of this theory, and "analysis" is commonly used for advanced parts.

Cryopreservation of people and other large animals is not reversible with current technology.

=== Islam ===

The Islamic view is that death is the separation of the soul from the body as well as the beginning of the afterlife.

Human languages possess the properties of productivity and displacement, which enable the creation of an infinite number of sentences, and the ability to refer to objects, events, and ideas that are not immediately present in the discourse.

Its 2024 gross domestic product (GDP) of more than $29 trillion constituted over 25% of nominal global economic output, or 15% at purchasing power parity (PPP).

The United States is the world's largest importer and second-largest exporter.

Major techno-utopian movements include transhumanism and singularitarianism.

The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has provided security at most major airports since 2001.

== Culture and society ==

The United States is home to a wide variety of ethnic groups, traditions, and customs.

A group of languages that descend from a common ancestor is known as a language family; in contrast, a language that has been demonstrated not to have any living or non-living relationship with another language is called a language isolate.

On the collegiate level, earnings for the member institutions exceed $1 billion annually, and college football and basketball attract large audiences, as the NCAA March Madness tournament and the College Football Playoff are some of the most watched national sporting events.

The earliest known revolt against technology was Luddism, a pushback against early automation in textile production.

Early trade involved materials for creating tools, like obsidian, exchanged over short distances.

Therefore, Hinduism has been called the oldest religion in the world.

Historians focused on early modern history, which started roughly in 1500 CE, commonly highlight how European states rose to global power.

==== Novel ====

A novel is a long fictional narrative, usually written in prose.

However, the development of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) meant that such a state was no longer strictly irreversible.

As folklores and legends were performed in front of distant audiences, the singers would substitute the names in the stories with local characters or rulers to give the stories a local flavor and thus connect with the audience by making the historicity embedded in the oral tradition as unreliable.

The diner soon evolved into purpose-built structures whose number expanded greatly in the 20th century.

Number theory dates back to ancient Babylon and probably China.

The oldest mathematical texts from Mesopotamia and Egypt are from 2000 to 1800 BC.

Candidates for president campaign with a vice-presidential running mate.

Stix, Gary, "Thinking without Words: Cognition doesn't require language, it turns out" (interview with Evelina Fedorenko, a cognitive neuroscientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology), Scientific American, vol.

Its geopolitical attention also turned to the Indo-Pacific when the United States joined the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue with Australia, India, and Japan.

This is evident in the art of India, Tibet, and Japan.

Communication improved with the invention of the telegraph, the telephone, the radio, and television.

Some cultures, for example, have elaborate systems of "social deixis", or systems of signalling social distance through linguistic means.

Ancient Greek historian Polybius described superstition in ancient Rome as an instrumentum regni, an instrument of maintaining the cohesion of the Empire.

However, Aristotle also noted a focus on quantity alone may not distinguish mathematics from sciences like physics; in his view, abstraction and studying quantity as a property "separable in thought" from real instances set mathematics apart.

Relations ranged from close cooperation to warfare and massacres.

Additionally, grieving relatives of dead soldiers and death notification are embedded in many cultures.

Echoes of James' and Durkheim's definitions are to be found in the writings of, for example, Frederick Ferré who defined religion as "one's way of valuing most comprehensively and intensively".

=== American Revolution and the early republic (1765–1800) ===

Following their victory in the French and Indian War, Britain began to assert greater control over local colonial affairs, resulting in colonial political resistance; one of the primary colonial grievances was a denial of their rights as Englishmen, particularly the right to representation in the British government that taxed them.

It is also concerned with the moral evaluation of character traits and institutions.

Advanced industrial societies see a shift toward an increase in service sectors, over manufacturing.

Hollywood, a district in northern Los Angeles, the nation's second-most populous city, is also metonymous for the American filmmaking industry.

The U.S. implemented a policy of containment intended to limit the Soviet Union's sphere of influence; engaged in regime change against governments perceived to be aligned with the Soviets; and prevailed in the Space Race, which culminated with the first crewed Moon landing in 1969.

Both science and religion are not monolithic, timeless, or static because both are complex social and cultural endeavors that have changed through time across languages and cultures.

By defining another person's religious stories and beliefs as mythology, one implies that they are less real or true than one's own religious stories and beliefs.

== History ==

As a discipline, the history of philosophy aims to provide a systematic and chronological exposition of philosophical concepts and doctrines.

In a sentence such as "Sally runs", the predicate is "runs", because it is the word that predicates a specific state about its argument "Sally".

== Emerging technologies ==

Emerging technologies are novel technologies whose development or practical applications are still largely unrealized.

Throughout this decade, technological innovations such as the World Wide Web, the evolution of the Pentium microprocessor in accordance with Moore's law, rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, the first gene therapy trial, and cloning either emerged in the U.S. or were improved upon there.

Even in modern times, some jobs remain available only to men, such as military service.

=== Modern ===

Starting in the United Kingdom in the 18th century, the discovery of steam power set off the Industrial Revolution, which saw wide-ranging technological discoveries, particularly in the areas of agriculture, manufacturing, mining, metallurgy, and transport, and the widespread application of the factory system.

Wine has been produced in what is now the United States since the 1500s, with the first widespread production beginning in what is now New Mexico in 1628.

The rules by which signs can be combined to form words and phrases are called syntax or grammar.

Early settlers and later immigrants combined these with foods they were familiar with, such as wheat flour, beef, and milk, to create a distinctive American cuisine.

For example, designing a survey often involves minimizing the cost of estimating a population mean with a given level of confidence.

With personal consumption expenditures of over $18.5 trillion in 2023, the U.S. has a heavily consumer-driven economy and is the world's largest consumer market.

Feminist historians study the role of gender in history, with a particular interest in analysing the experiences of women to challenge patriarchal perspectives.

In extreme forms, evidence is intentionally ignored or misinterpreted to construct misleading narratives, which can result in pseudohistory or historical denialism.

Philosophers of history, by contrast, tend to explore more general patterns, including evaluative questions about which methods and assumptions are correct.

The U.S. judicial system's 12 federal circuits divide the country into 12 separate geographic administrative regions for appeals decisions.

Some pottery is regarded as art pottery.

=== Theater ===

The United States is well known for its theater.

Diplomatic and military history are associated with political history.

In general, children are required to attend school or an approved homeschool from the age of five or six (kindergarten or first grade) until they are 18 years old.

Sentences can be described as consisting of phrases connected in a tree structure, connecting the phrases to each other at different levels.

Impressionism and Cubism.

Of these, two-thirds die directly or indirectly due to senescence, but in industrialized countries – such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germany – the rate approaches 90% (i.e., nearly nine out of ten of all deaths are related to senescence).

Its focus was on religious topics and many thinkers used ancient philosophy to explain and further elaborate Christian doctrines.

New technologies were developed, including sewage systems, electricity, light bulbs, electric motors, railroads, automobiles, and airplanes.

However, developments in modern literature, including free verse and prose poetry have tended to blur the differences, and poet T.S.

Their co-occurrence might be due to universal laws governing the structure of natural languages, "language universals", or they might be the result of languages evolving convergent solutions to the recurring communicative problems that humans use language to solve.

U.S. newspapers with a global reach and reputation include The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, The Washington Post, and USA Today.

Only one of them, the Riemann hypothesis, duplicates one of Hilbert's problems.

This choice is often guided by epistemological considerations about what constitutes philosophical evidence.

[ˈkomo te ˈjamas] in Standard Spanish, but [ˈkomo ˈtu te ˈjama] in Caribbean Spanish.

The main traditional responses are materialism, which assumes that matter is more fundamental; idealism, which assumes that mind is more fundamental; and dualism, which assumes that mind and matter are distinct types of entities.

Concepts most of them share in common include karma, caste, reincarnation, mantras, yantras, and darśana.

In industrialized nations, the proportion is much higher, approaching 90%.

In 2023, the total fertility rate for the U.S. stood at 1.6 children per woman, and, at 23%, it had the world's highest rate of children living in single-parent households in 2019.

Major figures in contemporary linguistics include Ferdinand de Saussure and Noam Chomsky.

Controversial, religious, political and instructional literature proliferated during the European Renaissance as a result of the Johannes Gutenberg's invention of the printing press around 1440, while the Medieval romance developed into the novel.

It is a megadiverse country, with the world's third-largest land area and third-largest population, exceeding 340 million.

After death, the remains of a former organism become part of the biogeochemical cycle, during which animals may be consumed by a predator or a scavenger.

The AIDS death toll in Africa may reach 90–100 million by 2025.

Some modern approaches, by contrast, seek to foster a more active engagement and a deeper interdisciplinary understanding of general patterns, focusing not only on what happened but also on why it happened and its lasting historical significance.

Assessment through oral or written tests aims to ensure that learning goals are reached.

It included most forms of rational inquiry, such as the individual sciences, as its subdisciplines.

Complex geometry, the geometry obtained by replacing real numbers with complex numbers.

This mathematical abstraction from reality is embodied in the modern philosophy of formalism, as founded by David Hilbert around 1910.

Influential traditions in the history of philosophy include Western, Arabic–Persian, Indian, and Chinese philosophy.

Early printed books, single sheets, and images created before 1501 in Europe are known as incunables or incunabula.

=== Theories ===

Sociological and anthropological theories of religion generally attempt to explain the origin and function of religion.

Vaidika Dharma is a synecdoche describing the similar philosophies of Vaishnavism, Shaivism, and related groups practiced or founded in the Indian subcontinent.

Such features are especially evident in the sexually dimorphic phenotypic traits that distinguish between the sexes, but—unlike the primary sex characteristics—are not directly part of the reproductive system.

A related perspective focuses on a general understanding of the human condition, making people aware of the diversity of human behaviour across different contexts—similar to what one can learn by visiting foreign countries.

Neo-Druidism is a religion promoting harmony with nature, named after but not necessarily connected to the Iron Age druids.

English uses the nominative-accusative word typology: in English transitive clauses, the subjects of both intransitive sentences ("I run") and transitive sentences ("I love you") are treated in the same way, shown here by the nominative pronoun I.

A common theme among many such conceptions is that philosophy is concerned with meaning, understanding, or the clarification of language.

Although drama was popular in ancient Greece, of the hundreds of tragedies written and performed during the classical age, only a limited number of plays by three authors still exist: Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides.

The system is further extended by state highways and some private toll roads.

Peter Mandaville and Paul James intended to get away from the modernist dualisms or dichotomous understandings of immanence/transcendence, spirituality/materialism, and sacredness/secularity.

Also] there's the 'bouba-kiki' effect, whereby people from varying cultures are more likely to associate the nonsense word 'bouba' with a rounded shape and 'kiki' with a spiked one.... [S]omehow we all have a feeling about this,' says Aleksandra Ćwiek... [She and her colleagues have] show[n] that people associate the trilled 'R' sound with roughness and the 'L' sound with smoothness.

In 2017, out of the U.S. foreign-born population, some 45% (20.7 million) were naturalized citizens, 27% (12.3 million) were lawful permanent residents, 6% (2.2 million) were temporary lawful residents, and 23% (10.5 million) were unauthorized immigrants.

Significantly, this is a "minimum age constraint for human presence in Victoria", and also could be interpreted as evidence for the oral histories of the Gunditjmara people, an Aboriginal Australian people of south-western Victoria, which tell of volcanic eruptions being some of the oldest oral traditions in existence.

=== Status ===
Anthropology has shown that masculinity itself has social status, just like wealth, race and social class.

However, religion also affects political decisions in many western countries.

Unlike most other branches, oral history relies on oral reports rather than written documents, encompassing eyewitness accounts, hearsay, and communal legends.

Sound change can consist of the replacement of one speech sound or phonetic feature by another, the complete loss of the affected sound, or even the introduction of a new sound in a place where there had been none.

The theistic form of belief in this tradition, even when downgraded culturally, is formative of the dichotomous Western view of religion.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== Other sources ===


== Further reading ==

Technology is the application of conceptual knowledge to achieve practical goals, especially in a reproducible way.

The five most popular websites used in the U.S. are Google, YouTube, Facebook, Amazon, and Reddit—all of them American-owned.

This became the foundational crisis of mathematics.

In the view of Karl Marx, human beings are intrinsically, necessarily and by definition social beings who, beyond being "gregarious creatures", cannot survive and meet their needs other than through social co-operation and association.

The U.S. has free trade agreements with several countries, including the USMCA.

Often-discussed sources of knowledge are perception, introspection, memory, inference, and testimony.

Frequency of reproduction plays an equally important role in determining species survival: an organism that dies young but leaves numerous offspring displays, according to Darwinian criteria, much greater fitness than a long-lived organism leaving only one.

Metaphysics examines the most general features of reality, existence, objects, and properties.

The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 from France nearly doubled the territory of the United States.

It further aims to acquaint students with historical research methodologies, including the abilities to interpret and critically evaluate historical claims.

==== Hinduism ====
Hinduism is also called Vaidika Dharma, the dharma of the Vedas, although many practitioners refer to their religion as Sanātana Dharma ("the Eternal Dharma") which refers to the idea that its origins lie beyond human history.

In India, Mahatma Gandhi's philosophy of non-violence shaped the Indian independence movement.

Many countries have formed international political organizations and alliances, the largest being the United Nations with 193 member states.

"; "Which has priority: well-being or obligation?

Because of its use of optimization, the mathematical theory of statistics overlaps with other decision sciences, such as operations research, control theory, and mathematical economics.

Their premier leagues are, respectively, the National Basketball Association, Major League Baseball, Major League Soccer, and the National Hockey League.

It is particularly derived from the Italian Socii states, historical allies of the Roman Republic, though they rebelled against Rome in the Social War of 91–87 BC.

The main proponent of such a theory is Noam Chomsky, the originator of the generative theory of grammar, who has defined language as the construction of sentences that can be generated using transformational grammars.

African Americans constitute the country's third-largest ancestry group and are 12.1% of the total U.S. population.

A related issue in journalism is how to ensure truth and objectivity when reporting on events.

In areas where many languages are in close contact, this may lead to the formation of language areas in which unrelated languages share a number of linguistic features.

But sub-Saharan Africa, and southwest Asia lagged behind the rest of the world; only 72% of men in sub-Saharan Africa were literate.

"; and "Are humans free?"

It was systematized by Adi Shankara (c. 700–750 CE), who held that everything is one and that the impression of a universe consisting of many distinct entities is an illusion.

An important difference between first language acquisition and additional language acquisition is that the process of additional language acquisition is influenced by languages that the learner already knows.

One study, for example, suggested that the presence of familiar cultural values in literary texts played an important impact on the performance of minority students.

There are many risk-factors involved in miscarriage; consumption of caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, drugs, having a previous miscarriage, and the use of abortion can increase the chances of having a miscarriage.

It generally involves making marks on a surface by applying pressure from a tool, or moving a tool across a surface.

Scholars have indicated that global religiosity may be increasing due to religious countries having generally higher birth rates.

During the 15th to 17th centuries, historians placed greater emphasis on the didactic role of history, using it to promote the established order or argue for a return to an idealised vision of the past.

This allows them to build permanent or semi-permanent villages.

The Hudson River School was a mid-19th-century movement in the visual arts tradition of European naturalism.

Pluricentric languages, which are languages with more than one standard variety, are a case in point.

These bound morphemes or affixes can be classified according to their position in relation to the root: prefixes precede the root, suffixes follow the root, and infixes are inserted in the middle of a root.

Many early texts mention Pythagorean triples and so, by inference, the Pythagorean theorem seems to be the most ancient and widespread mathematical concept after basic arithmetic and geometry.

Foundationalists avoid this conclusion by arguing that some sources can provide justification without requiring justification themselves.

(The Philippines was granted full independence from the U.S. on July 4, 1946, following World War II.

Ethnicity is separate from the concept of race, which is based on physical characteristics, although both are socially constructed.

The amendments codified nationally the abolition of slavery and involuntary servitude except as punishment for crimes, promised equal protection under the law for all persons, and prohibited discrimination on the basis of race or previous enslavement.

By the start of the 21st century, only about 20 to 25% of people in developed countries died outside of a medical institution.

Often motivated by specific ideological agendas, pseudohistorical practices mimic historical methodology to promote biased, misleading narratives that lack rigorous analysis and scholarly consensus.

It was established as federal law with the Copyright Act of 1790.

Analysis includes many subareas shared by other areas of mathematics which include:

Multivariable calculus
Functional analysis, where variables represent varying functions
Integration, measure theory and potential theory, all strongly related with probability theory on a continuum
Ordinary differential equations
Partial differential equations
Numerical analysis, mainly devoted to the computation on computers of solutions of ordinary and partial differential equations that arise in many applications


=== Discrete mathematics ===

Discrete mathematics, broadly speaking, is the study of individual, countable mathematical objects.

=== East Asian ===

East Asian religions (also known as Far Eastern religions or Taoic religions) consist of several religions of East Asia which make use of the concept of Tao (in Chinese), Dō (in Japanese or Korean) or Đạo (in Vietnamese).

"Sally cursed John".

The National Guard personnel of a state or territory can be federalized by the president under the National Defense Act Amendments of 1933; this legislation created the Guard and provides for the integration of Army National Guard and Air National Guard units and personnel into the U.S. Army and (since 1947) the U.S. Air Force.

These anticipated consequences can then be used to confirm or refute philosophical theories.

Language loss occurs when the language has no more native speakers, and becomes a dead language.

In a study, two groups were formed; one group was asked to reflect upon their mortality, the other was not, afterwards, the groups were told to set a bond for a prostitute.

The use of writing has made language even more useful to humans.

==== Animal sacrifice ====

Some (but not all) religions practise animal sacrifice, the ritual killing and offering of an animal to appease or maintain favour with a deity.

Following this separation of body and spirit (death), resurrection will occur.

This atomistic view of economics allows it to relatively easily mathematize its thinking, because individual calculations are transposed into mathematical calculations.

Humans are sexually dimorphic in body size, body structure, and body composition.

Some of the deadliest natural disasters are the 1931 China floods, which killed an estimated 4 million people, although estimates widely vary; the 1887 Yellow River flood, which killed an estimated 2 million people in China; and the 1970 Bhola cyclone, which killed as many as 500,000 people in East Pakistan (present-day Bangladesh).

==== Non-fiction ====
Common literary examples of non-fiction include, the essay; travel literature; biography, autobiography and memoir; journalism; letter; diary; history, philosophy, economics; scientific, nature, and technical writings.

One moment the person is walking, eating, or sleeping, and the next moment, the person is dead.

Much of the work of Congress is performed by a collection of committees, each appointed for a specific purpose or function.

The Western advancements in science and technology led to the establishment of centralized education systems in many nation-states, with mathematics as a core component—initially for its military applications.

Religion and morality are not synonymous.

History teachers employ a variety of teaching methods.

The school of Advaita Vedanta developed later in this period.

The history of philosophy is primarily concerned with theories based on rational inquiry and argumentation; some historians understand it in a looser sense that includes myths, religious teachings, and proverbial lore.

U.S. theater has an active community theater culture.

The modern period started in the 17th century.

In the prior year, there were 15,460 licensed full-power radio stations in the U.S. according to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).

This view is based on the idea that an understanding of the past can guide decision-making, for example, to avoid repeating previous mistakes.

For example, Socrates stated that "the unexamined life is not worth living" to highlight the role of philosophical inquiry in understanding one's own existence.

The climate is arid in the Southwest, Mediterranean in coastal California, and oceanic in coastal Oregon, Washington, and southern Alaska.

Bands and tribes are relatively egalitarian, and decisions are reached through consensus.

Service is concentrated in the Northeast, California, the Midwest, the Pacific Northwest, and Virginia/Southeast.

Latin American philosophy in the pre-colonial period was practiced by indigenous civilizations and explored questions concerning the nature of reality and the role of humans.

Paul Erdős expressed this sentiment more ironically by speaking of "The Book", a supposed divine collection of the most beautiful proofs.

For example, Cage's composition Living Room Music, composed in 1940, is a quartet for unspecified instruments, really non-melodic objects, that can be found in the living room of a typical house, hence the title.

Wicca is a neo-pagan religion first popularised in 1954 by British civil servant Gerald Gardner, involving the worship of a God and Goddess.

=== Computational mathematics ===

Computational mathematics is the study of mathematical problems that are typically too large for human, numerical capacity.

Death eventually and inevitably occurs in all organisms.

Most Christians can describe their faith with the Nicene Creed.

For example, in mathematics, "or" means "one, the other or both", while, in common language, it is either ambiguous or means "one or the other but not both" (in mathematics, the latter is called "exclusive or").

The 1913 Armory Show in New York City, an exhibition of European modernist art, shocked the public and transformed the U.S. art scene.

Before the Yugoslav Wars, Serbo-Croatian was generally considered a single language with two normative variants, but due to sociopolitical reasons, Croatian and Serbian are now often treated as separate languages and employ different writing systems.

Within each branch, there are competing schools of philosophy that promote different principles, theories, or methods.

=== Publishing ===

Publishing became possible with the invention of writing but became more practical with the invention of printing.

The Mississippi River System, the world's fourth-longest river system, runs predominantly north–south through the center of the country.

The Appalachian Mountains and the Adirondack Massif separate the East Coast from the Great Lakes and the grasslands of the Midwest.

By contrast, the 54 U.S. National Guard organizations fall under the dual control of state or territorial governments and the federal government; their units can also become federalized entities, but SDFs cannot be federalized.

Oceania became involved in various conflicts during the world wars and experienced decolonization in the post-war period.

In 2022, 333 incorporated municipalities had populations over 100,000, nine cities had more than one million residents, and four cities—New York City, Los Angeles,  Chicago, and Houston—had populations exceeding two million.

Although the concept of information society has been discussed since the 1930s, in the present day, it is almost always applied to ways that information technologies impact society and culture.

Some types of architecture manipulate space, volume, texture, light, shadow, or abstract elements, to achieve pleasing aesthetics.

It is interested in the essence of the world as a whole.

The narratives presented in them can change as historians discover new evidence or reinterpret already-known sources.

They evolved into the American Revolution, which led to the Declaration of Independence and a society based on universal rights.

Major American poets of the 19th century American Renaissance include Walt Whitman, Melville, and Emily Dickinson.

Epistemology studies what knowledge is and how to acquire it.

=== Contemporary (1991–present) ===

The 1990s saw the longest recorded economic expansion in American history, a dramatic decline in U.S. crime rates, and advances in technology.

The term was also closely related to other terms like scrupulus (which meant "very precisely"), and some Roman authors related the term superstitio (which meant too much fear or anxiety or shame) to religiō at times.

Around 300 BC, Euclid organized mathematical knowledge by way of postulates and first principles, which evolved into the axiomatic method that is used in mathematics today, consisting of definition, axiom, theorem, and proof.

== Symbolic notation and terminology ==

Mathematical notation is widely used in science and engineering for representing complex concepts and properties in a concise, unambiguous, and accurate way.

Others focus on broad territories that encompass entire continents, like the histories of Africa, Asia, Europe, the Americas, and Oceania.

The Census Bureau's official 2024 population estimate was 340,110,988, an increase of 2.6% since the 2020 census.

As a formal reference to a dead person, it has become common practice to use the participle form of "decease", as in "the deceased"; another noun form is "decedent".

Similarly, one of the two main schools of thought in Pythagoreanism was known as the mathēmatikoi (μαθηματικοί)—which at the time meant "learners" rather than "mathematicians" in the modern sense.

Early history education aims to make students interested in the past and familiarize them with fundamental concepts of historical thought.

The arts are a medium through which humans cultivate distinct social, cultural, and individual identities while transmitting values, impressions, judgments, ideas, visions, spiritual meanings, patterns of life, and experiences across time and space.

Similarly as in science, theories and results (theorems) are often obtained from experimentation.

Agreeing to a "Europe first" policy, the U.S. concentrated its wartime efforts on Japan's allies Italy and Germany until their final defeat in May 1945.

The Americas were home to some of the earliest civilizations, like the Norte Chico civilization in South America and the Maya and Olmec civilizations in Central America.

These groupings allow philosophers to focus on a set of similar topics and interact with other thinkers who are interested in the same questions.

Throughout human history, energy production was the main constraint on economic development, and new technologies allowed humans to significantly increase the amount of available energy.

=== The brain ===

The brain is the coordinating center of all linguistic activity; it controls both the production of linguistic cognition and of meaning and the mechanics of speech production.

The first area is Wernicke's area, which is in the posterior section of the superior temporal gyrus in the dominant cerebral hemisphere.

Economic history examines how commodities are produced, exchanged, and consumed.

Comparisons also extend to whole eras from ancient to modern times.

One view holds that there are general laws of history that determine the course of events, similar to the laws of nature studied in the natural sciences.

The 48 contiguous states border Canada to the north and Mexico to the south, with the semi-exclave of Alaska in the northwest and the archipelago of Hawaii in the Pacific Ocean.

There are also notable African diasporic religions practiced in the Americas, such as Santeria, Candomble, Vodun, Lucumi, Umbanda, and Macumba.

Enslavement of Africans was practiced in all colonies by 1770 and supplied most of the labor for the Southern Colonies' plantation economy.

However, there have been disputes on whether or not to classify something as a work of art, referred to as classificatory disputes about art.

That same year, Puerto Rico, the Philippines, and Guam were ceded to the U.S. by Spain after the latter's defeat in the Spanish–American War.

== Definition ==

Scholars have failed to agree on a definition of religion.

Ceramics exclude glass and mosaics made from glass tesserae.

=== Academic definitions ===

Attempts to provide more precise definitions of philosophy are controversial and are studied in metaphilosophy.

Christian historians drew from Greco-Roman and Jewish traditions and reinterpreted the past from a religious perspective as a narrative highlighting God's divine plan.

The central hub of the American theater scene is the Theater District in Manhattan, with its divisions of Broadway, off-Broadway, and off-off-Broadway.

Banjos were brought to America through the slave trade.

Feeding America estimates that around one in five, or approximately 13 million, children experience hunger in the U.S. and do not know where or when they will get their next meal.

Some sources say that the term was coined by the pre-Socratic philosopher Pythagoras, but this is not certain.

Nanobots could be used within the human body to destroy cancer cells or form new body parts, blurring the line between biology and technology.

A common approach is to define mathematics by its object of study.

These organs consist of the lungs, the voice box (larynx), and the upper vocal tract – the throat, the mouth, and the nose.

"Researchers are continually discovering cases of symbolism, or sound iconicity, in which a word's intrinsic nature has some connection to its meaning.

A goal of art criticism is the pursuit of a rational basis for art appreciation but it is questionable whether such criticism can transcend prevailing sociopolitical circumstances.

Functional theories of grammar explain grammatical structures by their communicative functions, and understand the grammatical structures of language to be the result of an adaptive process by which grammar was "tailored" to serve the communicative needs of its users.

The study of the process of semiosis, how signs and meanings are combined, used, and interpreted is called semiotics.

Human language is unusual in being able to refer to abstract concepts and to imagined or hypothetical events as well as events that took place in the past or may happen in the future.

It aims to understand how to distinguish good from bad arguments.

The earliest known Greek writings are Mycenaean (c. 1600–1100 BC), written in the Linear B syllabary on clay tablets.

Federalism grants substantial autonomy to the 50 states.

He formulated a detailed critique of philosophy and tried to assign philosophy a more limited place besides the teachings of the Quran and mystical insight.

For example, if a historian writes a text about slavery based on an analysis of historical documents, then the text is a secondary source on slavery and a primary source on the historian's opinion.

As an object of linguistic study, "language" has two primary meanings: an abstract concept, and a specific linguistic system, e.g.

Examples of techno-utopian goals include post-scarcity economics, life extension, mind uploading, cryonics, and the creation of artificial superintelligence.

Several other first-level areas have "geometry" in their names or are otherwise commonly considered part of geometry.

Among the last important books written primarily in Latin prose were the works of Swedenborg (d. 1772), Linnaeus (d. 1778), Euler (d. 1783), Gauss (d. 1855), and Isaac Newton (d. 1727).

Science-based definitions usually face the problem of explaining why philosophy in its long history has not progressed to the same extent or in the same way as the sciences.

Prototypically, verbs are used to construct predicates, while nouns are used as arguments of predicates.

Whether this perception is accurate has been a topic of debate.

States bordering the Gulf of Mexico are prone to hurricanes, and most of the world's tornadoes occur in the country, mainly in Tornado Alley.

war) has long been the subject of debate.

Neo-Confucianism became an influential school of thought in the 16th century and the following Edo period and prompted a greater focus on language and the natural world.

Conceptual analysis is a common method in analytic philosophy.

By an extremely wide margin, the largest unifying cause of death in the developed world is biological aging, leading to various complications known as aging-associated diseases.

Cultural critic Neil Postman distinguished tool-using societies from technological societies and from what he called "technopolies", societies that are dominated by an ideology of technological and scientific progress to the detriment of other cultural practices, values, and world views.

Euclidean geometry was developed without change of methods or scope until the 17th century, when René Descartes introduced what is now called Cartesian coordinates.

The U.S. national government is a presidential constitutional federal republic and representative democracy with three separate branches: legislative, executive, and judicial.

Word classes can be "open" if new words can continuously be added to the class, or relatively "closed" if there is a fixed number of words in a class.

Mathematically, the symmetries of an object form a group known as the symmetry group.

The United States private sector dominates the global commercial spaceflight industry.

The arts can employ skill and imagination to produce physical objects and performances, convey insights and experiences, and construct new natural environments and spaces.

The pre-Columbian Mesoamerican writing systems (including among others Olmec and Maya scripts) are generally believed to have had independent origins.

There were about 771,480 homeless persons in the U.S. in 2024.

It aims to understand different types of conscious and unconscious mental states, like beliefs, desires, intentions, feelings, sensations, and free will.

Science fiction is often used as a source of ideas.

Commemoration ceremonies after death may include various mourning, funeral practices, and ceremonies of honoring the deceased.

Mann only came to mean "man" in Middle English, replacing wer, which survives today only in the compounds "werewolf" (from Old English werwulf, literally "man-wolf"), and "wergild", literally "man-payment".

Latin uses morphology to express the distinction between subject and object, whereas English uses word order.

However, popular mathematics writing can overcome this by using applications or cultural links.

Primary sex characteristics (or sex organs) are characteristics that are present at birth and are integral to the reproductive process.

This process is called ablaut.

The influence that the United States exerts on other countries through soft power is referred to as Americanization.

== Awards ==
There are numerous awards recognizing achievements and contributions in literature.

Nanoethics examines issues surrounding the alteration of matter at the atomic and molecular level in various disciplines including computer science, engineering, and biology.

With technological advances in the late 20th century, neurolinguists have also incorporated non-invasive techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrophysiology to study language processing in individuals without impairments.

The arts can refer to common, popular, or everyday practices as well as more sophisticated, systematic, or institutionalized ones.

The scientific study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt.

The 20th century brought a host of innovations.

=== Music ===

Music is defined as an art form which medium is a combination of sounds.

A few writing systems use opposite directions for alternating lines, and others, such as the ancient Maya script, can be written in either direction and rely on graphic cues to show the reader the direction of reading.

The philosophy of science examines the fundamental concepts, assumptions, and problems associated with science.

When used in communication, a sign is encoded and transmitted by a sender through a channel to a receiver who decodes it.

Unaffiliated populations are projected to drop, even when taking disaffiliation rates into account, due to differences in birth rates.

For example, an area of study is often qualified as mathematics as soon as one can prove theorems—assertions whose validity relies on a proof, that is, a purely logical deduction.

It systematized previous Confucian teachings and sought a metaphysical foundation of ethics.

NASA is one of five agencies collaborating on the International Space Station (ISS); U.S. contributions to the ISS include several modules, including Destiny (2001), Harmony (2007), and Tranquility (2010), as well as ongoing logistical and operational support.

Scarce, defensible resources can lead to wealth inequalities in horticultural political systems.

== See also ==
International Men's Day
International Men's Health Week
Lists of men
Men's studies
Patriarchy
Sexism


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Helgeson, Vicki S. (2017).

Homer's epic poetry, states Michael Gagarin, was largely composed, performed and transmitted orally.

== History ==


=== Oral literature ===

The use of the term "literature" here poses some issues due to its origins in the Latin littera, "letter," essentially writing.

A number of such language areas have been documented, among them, the Balkan language area, the Mesoamerican language area, and the Ethiopian language area.

The study of complex systems (evolution of unemployment, business capital, demographic evolution of a population, etc.)

This is not the case for particulars including individual persons or specific objects.

Philosopher Galen Strawson writes that the death that many people wish for is an instant, painless, unexperienced annihilation.

Founded in 19th-century Iran, it teaches the unity of all great religious traditions as the progressive unfolding of one religion and accepts all of the prophets of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam as well as additional prophets (Krishna, Buddha, Zoroaster), including its founder Bahá'u'lláh.

In spite of this, the term has also been applied to spoken or sung texts.

There, myth is defined as a story that is important for the group, whether or not it is objectively or provably true.

(p.

The concepts of science and religion are a recent invention: the term religion emerged in the 17th century in the midst of colonization and globalization and the Protestant Reformation.

The United States has a "Special Relationship" with the United Kingdom and strong ties with Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Japan, South Korea, Israel, and several European Union countries such as France, Italy, Germany, Spain, and Poland.

Many discussions in epistemology touch on the topic of philosophical skepticism, which raises doubts about some or all claims to knowledge.

Sex differentiation of the male fetus is governed by the SRY gene on the Y chromosome.

Some atheists, deists, and skeptics regard religious belief as superstition.

One such instance is armed conflicts, where men are often the immediate victims.

=== Western ===

Western philosophy originated in Ancient Greece in the 6th century BCE with the pre-Socratics.

The Old English word for "man" as distinct from "wif"/"woman" or "child" was wer.

Early human fossils can be inspected for traces of physical adaptation to language use or pre-linguistic forms of symbolic behaviour.

The role of architects, though changing, has been central to the design and implementation of pleasingly built environments in which people live.

The term was later adopted into Classical Latin as historia.

Though in both ancient Egypt and Mesoamerica, writing may have already emerged because of the need to record historical and environmental events.

Art refers to the way of doing or applying human creative skills, typically, but not necessarily, in visual form.

The sound of speech can be analyzed into a combination of segmental and suprasegmental elements.

Native Americans were also thought of as not having religions and also had no word for religion in their languages either.

A different perspective suggests that the main value of history lies in the lessons it teaches for the present.

Starting in 14th-century Europe, the Renaissance led to a shift away from medieval religious outlooks towards a renewed interest in the earlier classical tradition of Greece and Rome.

== Definitions ==

The English word language derives ultimately from Proto-Indo-European *dn̥ǵʰwéh₂s "tongue, speech, language" through Latin lingua, "language; tongue", and Old French language.

One example is the Uniform Determination Of Death Act in the United States.

=== Classical ===

Friedrich Schleiermacher in the late 18th century defined religion as das schlechthinnige Abhängigkeitsgefühl, commonly translated as "the feeling of absolute dependence".

Primary sources offer the most direct evidence of historical events.

(...) Indeed, if these final decades of the millennium have taught us anything, it must be that oral tradition never was the other we accused it of being; it never was the primitive, preliminary technology of communication we thought it to be.

Domestic violence against men is similarly stigmatized, although men make up half of the victims in heterosexual couples.

During puberty, hormones which stimulate androgen production result in the development of secondary sexual characteristics that result in even more differences between the sexes.

Bantu mythology is found throughout central, southeast, and southern Africa.

Often the fundamental postulate of mathematical economics is that of the rational individual actor – Homo economicus (lit.

It charges a fee for its central activity, on the basis of which it has been characterised as a commercial enterprise.

=== Proposed definitions ===

There is no general consensus about the definition of mathematics or its epistemological status—that is, its place inside knowledge.

== Relation to science and engineering ==

Engineering is the process by which technology is developed.

A solution to any of these problems carries a 1 million dollar reward.

Massillon JB (1879).

In syllabic scripts, such as the Inuktitut syllabary, each sign represents a whole syllable.

Cf.

Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter (1850) explored the dark side of American history, as did Herman Melville's Moby-Dick (1851).

Technological determinism is the idea that technologies cause unavoidable social changes.

The medieval period began with the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century CE and was marked by the spread of Christianity.

Consisting of nine members led by the Chief Justice of the United States, the court judges each case before it by majority decision.

In most cultures, male privilege allows men more rights and privileges than women.

France established its own settlements in French Florida in 1562, but they were either abandoned (Charlesfort, 1578) or destroyed by Spanish raids (Fort Caroline, 1565).

This produced more rigorous approaches, while transitioning from geometric methods to algebraic and then arithmetic proofs.

According to the same study it was found that adherents under the classification Irreligion or other religions hold about 34.8% of the total global wealth (while making up only about 20% of the world population, see section on classification).

Because of this, the U.S. Treasury Department sanctioned Blender.io, which marked the first time it has taken action against a mixer, to try to crack down on North Korean hackers.

There are an estimated 10,000 distinct religions worldwide, though nearly all of them have regionally based, relatively small followings.

In this unlikely scenario, the person dies without realizing it and without being able to fear it.

Physiological death is now seen as a process, more than an event: conditions once considered indicative of death are now reversible.

While opera is often categorized as the performing arts of music, the word itself is Italian for "works", because opera combines artistic disciplines into a singular artistic experience.

If they are free to be moved around within an utterance, they are usually called words, and if they are bound to other words or morphemes, they are called affixes.

By rotating their garden plots, horticulturists can stay in one area for a long period of time.

== Relationship with sciences ==
Mathematics is used in most sciences for modeling phenomena, which then allows predictions to be made from experimental laws.

Ancient Roman art depicted gods as idealized humans, shown with characteristically distinguishing features, such as Zeus' thunderbolt.

It conceptualizes and describes what happened by collecting and analysing evidence to construct narratives.

This is possible because human language is based on a dual code, in which a finite number of elements which are meaningless in themselves (e.g.

The supervolcano underlying Yellowstone National Park in the Rocky Mountains, the Yellowstone Caldera, is the continent's largest volcanic feature.

Herbert Marcuse and John Zerzan suggest that technological society will inevitably deprive us of our freedom and psychological health.

(p.

The flat and fertile prairie of the Great Plains stretches to the west, interrupted by a highland region in the southeast.

Performance art is a performance over time that combines any number of instruments, objects, and art within a predefined or less well-defined structure, some of which can be improvised.

This is a key issue for the sciences, which have as one of their prime objectives the creation of scientific knowledge.

Early genres included drama, fables, sutras and epic poetry.

The largest religious movements centered in Japan include Soka Gakkai, Tenrikyo, and Seicho-No-Ie among hundreds of smaller groups.

Additionally, many religious traditions, including Abrahamic and Dharmic traditions, hold that death does not (or may not) entail the end of consciousness.

Towards the end of the 19th century, mathematicians extended their analysis into geopolitics.

Twentieth century philosophers such as Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) argued that philosophy is really the study of language itself.

The U.S. Constitution establishes a separation of powers intended to provide a system of checks and balances to prevent any of the three branches from becoming supreme.

This is achieved through sustained and deliberate study, training, or theorizing within a particular tradition, generations, and even between civilizations.

Standard American English and Standard RP (English) English, for instance, may in some areas be more different than languages with names, e.g.

Intellectual historians examined the historical development of ideas.

=== Morphological classification ===
Some religion scholars classify religions as either universal religions that seek worldwide acceptance and actively look for new converts, such as the Baháʼí Faith, Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, and Jainism, while ethnic religions are identified with a particular ethnic group and do not seek converts.

Historical writing in the Song dynasty (960–1279 CE) happened in a variety of historical genres, including encyclopedias, biographies, and historical novels, while history became a standard subject in the Chinese educational system.

Sound changes can be conditioned in which case a sound is changed only if it occurs in the vicinity of certain other sounds.

In contrast, human language is open-ended and productive, meaning that it allows humans to produce a vast range of utterances from a finite set of elements, and to create new words and sentences.

This period eventually ended with the advent of the Progressive Era, which was characterized by significant reforms.

The opposite of fusional languages are agglutinative languages which construct words by stringing morphemes together in chains, but with each morpheme as a discrete semantic unit.

Parallel concepts are not found in many current and past cultures; there is no equivalent term for religion in many languages.

This makes it an origin myth, a myth that describes how a feature of the natural or social world appeared.

Anthropologists Lyle Steadman and Craig T. Palmer emphasized the communication of supernatural beliefs, defining religion as:

... the communicated acceptance by individuals of another individual's "supernatural" claim, a claim whose accuracy is not verifiable by the senses.

For instance, language (with its grammar) is a cultural element while sacralization of language in which a particular religious scripture is written is more often a religious practice.

Their study became autonomous parts of algebra, and include:

group theory
field theory
vector spaces, whose study is essentially the same as linear algebra
ring theory
commutative algebra, which is the study of commutative rings, includes the study of polynomials, and is a foundational part of algebraic geometry
homological algebra
Lie algebra and Lie group theory
Boolean algebra, which is widely used for the study of the logical structure of computers
The study of types of algebraic structures as mathematical objects is the purpose of universal algebra and category theory.

The anthropologist Marshall Sahlins described hunter-gatherers as the "original affluent society" due to their extended leisure time: Sahlins estimated that adults in hunter gatherer societies work three to five hours per day.

It explores how a state was organized internally, like factions, parties, leaders, and other political institutions.

Buddhists generally agree that Gotama aimed to help sentient beings end their suffering (dukkha) by understanding the true nature of phenomena, thereby escaping the cycle of suffering and rebirth (saṃsāra), that is, achieving nirvana.

the act of "naming", which creates a new name for some entity, or the act of "pronouncing someone man and wife", which creates a social contract of marriage.

By the term divine James meant "any object that is godlike, whether it be a concrete deity or not" to which the individual feels impelled to respond with solemnity and gravity.

== History ==


=== Etymology ===
The word mathematics comes from the Ancient Greek word máthēma (μάθημα), meaning 'something learned, knowledge, mathematics', and the derived expression mathēmatikḗ tékhnē (μαθηματικὴ τέχνη), meaning 'mathematical science'.

Almost all countries have embassies and many have consulates (official representatives) in the country.

One of the more popular writers in Europe in her lifetime, being more renowned than both Victor Hugo and Honoré de Balzac in England in the 1830s and 1840s, Sand is recognised as one of the most notable writers of the European Romantic era.

In one-person pottery studios, ceramists or potters produce studio pottery.

=== Usage and meaning ===

When studying the way in which words and signs are used, it is often the case that words have different meanings, depending on the social context of use.

They explore Asia's role as one of the cradles of civilization, with the emergence of some of the first ancient civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, and China beginning in the 4th and 3rd millennia BCE.

In 2021, the U.S. ranked second (also after China) by the number of patent applications, and third by trademark and industrial design applications (after China and Germany), according to World Intellectual Property Indicators.

Some of its questions are "What counts as an adequate explanation?

The resulting Euclidean geometry is the study of shapes and their arrangements constructed from lines, planes and circles in the Euclidean plane (plane geometry) and the three-dimensional Euclidean space.

Nonetheless, American film companies have been subject to the forces of globalization in the 21st century, and an increasing number of films are made elsewhere.

sounds and words, that can be distinguished from each other and rearranged in different patterns; and the productivity of the linguistic system, meaning that the finite number of linguistic elements can be combined into a theoretically infinite number of combinations.

A complex social process of "language making" underlies these assignments of status and in some cases even linguistic experts may not agree (e.g.

== Psychology ==

Death studies is a field within psychology.

It analyzes the meaning of ethical concepts, like right action and obligation.

Then came the agricultural revolution: humans no longer needed to hunt or gather to survive, and began to settle in towns and cities, forming more complex societies, with militaries and more organized forms of religion.

Traditionally, semantics has been understood to be the study of how speakers and interpreters assign truth values to statements, so that meaning is understood to be the process by which a predicate can be said to be true or false about an entity, e.g.

U.S. sovereignty over the unpopulated Bajo Nuevo Bank, Navassa Island, Serranilla Bank, and Wake Island is disputed.

The attempt is a natural consequence of the Western speculative, intellectualistic, and scientific disposition.

Mainstream American culture is a Western culture largely derived from the traditions of European immigrants with influences from many other sources, such as traditions brought by slaves from Africa.

Language is thought to have gradually diverged from earlier primate communication systems when early hominins acquired the ability to form a theory of mind and shared intentionality.

For example, in the 1940s and 1950s, when knowledge of turbulent combustion or fluid dynamics was still crude, jet engines were invented through "running the device to destruction, analyzing what broke [...] and repeating the process".

Men are portrayed more frequently in television than women and most commonly appear as leads in action and drama programming.

=== Science and technology ===

The United States has been a leader in technological innovation since the late 19th century and scientific research since the mid-20th century.

Around six months of age, a child will begin babbling, producing the speech sounds or handshapes of the languages used around them.

Modern physics uses mathematics abundantly, and is also considered to be the motivation of major mathematical developments.

The sharia thus affects up to 23% of the global population, or 1.57 billion people who are Muslims.

There are also different customs for honoring the lifeless body, such as a funeral, cremation, or sky burial.

One of the most violent, the California genocide of thousands of Native inhabitants, lasted into the mid-1870s.

The earliest confirmed names are that of Gal-Sal and his two slaves named En-pap X and Sukkalgir, from c. 3100 BC.

Consistency with available sources is one of the main standards of historical works.

=== Violence ===

Critics such as Hector Avalos, Regina Schwartz, Christopher Hitchens, and Richard Dawkins have argued that religions are inherently violent and harmful to society by using violence to promote their goals, in ways that are endorsed and exploited by their leaders.

This was followed a century later by the Second Industrial Revolution which led to rapid scientific discovery, standardization, and mass production.

Instead, they highlight the subjective nature of historical interpretation, which leads to a multiplicity of divergent perspectives.

There are no formal political offices containing real power in band societies, rather a chief is merely a person of influence, and leadership is based on personal qualities.

There are many different formalist and functionalist frameworks that propose theories for describing syntactic structures, based on different assumptions about what language is and how it should be described.

About 28% of the country's land is publicly owned and federally managed, primarily in the Western States.

Within the visual arts, the applied arts, such as industrial design, graphic design, fashion design, interior design, and decorative arts are also included.

Social group living may have evolved in humans due to group selection in physical environments that made survival difficult.

Economists note that real people have limited information, make poor choices, and care about fairness and altruism, not just personal gain.

At the same time, support for slavery had strengthened in Southern states, with widespread use of inventions such as the cotton gin (1793) having made slavery immensely profitable for Southern elites.

A further approach presents philosophy as a linguistic therapy.

It is usually performed by a specialized medical doctor called a pathologist.

The U.S. spends more on education per student than any other country, an average of $18,614 per year per public elementary and secondary school student in 2020–2021.

Linguistic anthropologists and sociologists of language define communicative style as the ways that language is used and understood within a particular culture.

The plays of Aristophanes (c. 446 – c. 386 BC) provide the only real examples of a genre of comic drama known as Old Comedy, the earliest form of Greek Comedy, and are in fact used to define the genre.

This cemented the United States' global influence, reinforcing the concept of the "American Century" as the U.S. dominated international political, cultural, economic, and military affairs.

Some academics studying the subject have divided religions into three broad categories:

World religions, a term which refers to transcultural, international religions;
Indigenous religions, which refers to smaller, culture-specific or nation-specific religious groups; and
New religious movements, which refers to recently developed religions.

Examples of literature include fiction, drama, poetry, and prose.

Preparation for Death .

Meanwhile, influential religious systems and philosophical ideas were first formulated, such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Judaism, and Greek philosophy.

Such jobs tended to be either more strenuous, more prestigious, or more dangerous.

Jehovah's Witnesses, founded in the late 1870s by Charles Taze Russell.

They include conceptual analysis, reliance on common sense and intuitions, use of thought experiments, analysis of ordinary language, description of experience, and critical questioning.

Within this broader definition, literature includes non-fictional books, articles, or other written information on a particular subject.

The conflict surrounding abolitionism inspired writers, like Harriet Beecher Stowe, and authors of slave narratives, such as Frederick Douglass.

West African chimpanzees use stone hammers and anvils for cracking nuts, as do capuchin monkeys of Boa Vista, Brazil.

These narratives cover not only how events developed over time but also why they happened and in which contexts, providing an explanation of relevant background conditions and causal mechanisms.

However, the boundaries between these branches are vague and their relation to other thematic branches, such as intellectual history, is not always clear.

== Cultural impact ==


=== Artistic expression ===

Notes that sound well together to a Western ear are sounds whose fundamental frequencies of vibration are in simple ratios.

The U.S. Congress makes federal law, declares war, approves treaties, has the power of the purse, and has the power of impeachment.

This represents a major source of Christianity's Bible, which has had a major influence on Western literature.

